1
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Cardiorespiratory fitness is a strong and consistent 
predictor of morbidity and mortality among adults: an 
overview of meta-
 analyses representing over 20.9 
million observ
ations from 199 unique cohort studies
Justin J Lang ,1,2,3 Stephanie A Prince ,1,2 Katherine Merucci,4 
Cristina Cadenas-

Sanchez
 ,5,6 Jean- Philippe Chaput ,2,7,8 
Brooklyn J Fraser
 ,3,9 Taru Manyanga ,10 Ryan McGrath,3,11,12,13 
Francisco B Ortega
 ,5,14 Ben Singh ,3 Grant R Tomkinson 3 
Systematic review
To cite: Lang JJ, 
Prince SA, Merucci K, et al. 
Br J Sports Med Epub ahead 
of print: [please include Day 
Month Year]. doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2023-107849
 ► Additional supplemental 
material is published online 
only. To view, please visit the 
journal online (https://
 doi
.

org/

10.

1136/

bjsports-

2023-

107849).
F
or numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Justin J Lang, Public Health 
Agency of Canada, Ottawa, 
Canada; 

justin.

lang@

phac-

aspc.

gc.

ca
JJL and SAP are joint first 
authors.
Accepted 18 March 2024
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2024. Re-
 use 
permitted under CC BY
-
 NC
. No 
commercial re-
 use
. See rights 
and permissions. Published 
by BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Objective
 T
o examine and summarise evidence 
from meta-
 analyses of cohort studies that ev
aluated 
the predictive associations between baseline 
cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) and health outcomes 
among adults.
Design
 Overview of systematic reviews
.
Data source
 Five bibliogr
aphic databases were 
searched from January 2002 to March 2024.
Results
 F
rom the 9062 papers identified, we included 
26 systematic reviews. We found eight meta-
 analyses 
that described five unique mortality outcomes among 
gener
al populations. CRF had the largest risk reduction 
for all-
 cause mortality when comparing high versus 
low CRF (HR=0.47;
 95% CI 0.39 to 0.56). A dose–
response relationship for every 1-
 metabolic equiv
alent 
of task (MET) higher level of CRF was associated with 
a 11%–17%
 reduction in all-
 cause mortality (HR=0.89;

95% CI 0.86 to 0.92, and HR=0.83; 95% CI 0.78 
to 0.88). For incident outcomes, nine meta-
 analyses 
described 12 unique outcomes
. CRF was associated 
with the largest risk reduction in incident heart failure 
when comparing high versus low CRF (HR=0.31; 95% 
CI 0.19 to 0.49). A dose–response relationship for every 
1-
 MET higher level of CRF w
as associated with a 18% 
reduction in heart failure (HR=0.82; 95% CI 0.79 to 
0.84). Among those living with chronic conditions, nine 
meta-
 analyses described four unique outcomes in nine 
patient groups
. CRF was associated with the largest risk 
reduction for cardiovascular mortality among those living 
with cardiovascular disease when comparing high versus 
low CRF (HR=0.27; 95% CI 0.16 to 0.48). The certainty 
of the evidence across all studies ranged from very low-

to-
 moder
ate according to Grading of Recommendations, 
Assessment, Development and Evaluations.
Conclusion
 W
e found consistent evidence that high 
CRF is strongly associated with lower risk for a variety of 
mortality and incident chronic conditions in general and 
clinical populations.
INTRODUCTION
Cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) is a physical trait 
that reflects the integrated function of numerous 
bodily systems to deliver and use oxygen to support 
muscle activity during sustained, rhythmic, whole-

body
, large muscle physical activity. 1 CRF can 
be objectively measured using direct (usually by 
maximal exercise testing with concomitant gas 
exchange analysis)
2 or indirect (exercise predicted 
equations)3 4 methods with a variety of maximal or 
submaximal protocols using different modalities 
(eg, stationary cycling, treadmill running/walking, 
bench stepping, field-
 based 
running/walking). 
Non-
 ex
ercise prediction equations with reasonable 
validity are also available when direct CRF measure-
ment is not feasible.
5 6 CRF is commonly expressed 
as the maximum or peak rate of oxygen consump-
tion per kilogram of body mass (common units: mL/
kg/min) or metabolic equivalents of task (MET s). 
Nearly half of the variance in CRF is attributable 
to genetics, with the remainder modified primarily 
WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
 ⇒ Many systematic reviews have examined 
the prospective link between baseline 
cardiorespiratory fitness and health outcomes, 
but no study has compiled all the evidence to 
help identify important gaps in the literature.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
 ⇒ This study identified 26 systematic reviews with 
meta-
 analysis representing over 20.9
 million 
observ
ations from 199 unique cohort studies. 
Cardiorespiratory fitness was strongly and 
consistently protective of a variety of incident 
chronic conditions and mortality-
 related 
outcomes
.
 ⇒ Gaps in the literature continue to exist, with 
limited evidence available among women, 
and certain clinical populations. Several 
health outcomes could benefit from future 
meta-
 analyses
, including specific cancer 
types, especially among women (eg, breast 
cancer) and mental health conditions beyond 
depression.
HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, 
PRACTICE OR POLICY
 ⇒ Given the strength of the predictive utility of 
cardiorespiratory fitness across many health 
outcomes, cardiorespiratory fitness would be 
a valuable risk stratification tool in clinical 
practice.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

2
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
through habitual physical activity. 7 For example, brisk walking 
for approximately 150
 min per week 
can result in large rela-
tive improvements in CRF among sedentary and unfit individ-
uals.8 9 Even those with severe chronic disease can improve CRF 
through well-
 planned aerobic physical activity programmes.10
Low CRF is considered a strong chronic disease risk factor that 
is not routinely assessed in clinical practice. 11 Evidence suggests 
that the inclusion of CRF as a clinical vital sign would enhance 
patient management by improving the classification of those at 
high risk of adverse outcomes.
11 The evidence supporting CRF 
as an important risk factor has accumulated since the 1980s 
through large cohort studies that investigated the prospective 
risk of all-
 cause 
mortality and cardiovascular events associated 
with CRF.12–14 Research has linked CRF to the incidence of some 
cancers (eg, colon/rectum, lung), 15 type 2 diabetes, 16 metabolic 
syndrome,17 stroke18 and depression. 19 Higher CRF may even 
improve the prognosis in those with chronic conditions such as 
cancer,
20 peripheral artery disease,21 heart failure22 and chronic 
kidney disease.23
Given the mounting evidence supporting CRF as an important 
risk factor, numerous systematic reviews with meta-
 analyses

summarising results of primary studies for various health outcomes 
have been published. Kodama et al
24 published the first meta- 
analysis on the health-
 related predictive validity of CRF and found

that a 1-
 MET (3.5
 mL/kg/min) higher level of CRF was associated

with a 13% and 15% reduction in the risk of all-
 cause mortality

and cardiovascular disease (CVD) events, respectively. This study 
helped to establish the meaningful clinically important difference 
(MCID) of 1-
 MET 
for exercise trials. Since Kodama’s study, there 
have been several systematic reviews with meta-
 analyses, with

several published in recent years (ie, 2020+). Most systematic 
reviews have focused on a single health outcome. T o date, there 
has not been a systematic synthesis of the relationships between 
CRF and a broad range of health outcomes. T o help summarise 
the breadth of evidence, an overview of reviews provides a system-
atic method to examine evidence across a range of outcomes for a 
specific exposure.
25 Thus, the objective of this study was to conduct 
an overview of systematic reviews with meta-
 analyses from cohort

studies that investigated relationships between CRF and prospec-
tive health-
 related outcomes among adults. W
e also aimed to assess 
the certainty of the evidence for each identified health outcome.
METHODS
This overview followed the methods outlined in the Cochrane 
handbook,
25 and additional methods that were published else-
where.26 We adhered to both the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Overviews of Reviews statement 27 and the Meta- analyses of 
Observational 
Studies in Epidemiology reporting standards. 28 
The overview was prospectively registered with the PROS-
PERO international prospective register of systematic reviews 
(#CRD42022370149). Here, we present a condensed methods 
section with the full methods available in online supplemental 
methods.
Eligibility criteria
Population
Adult populations (≥18 years) including apparently healthy and 
clinical populations with diagnosed chronic conditions. Studies 
Initial search Search update
Figure 1 PRISMA flow chart depicting the number of papers identified, screened and included in the overview. *A list of excluded studies with 
reasons are provided in online supplemental appendix 2.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

3
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
that focused on certain special populations were excluded (ie, 
those recovering from surgery, athletes, disease at birth, preg-
nant individuals).
Exposure
The primary exposure was CRF measured using the following 
approaches: (1) maximal exercise testing with gas analysis (ie, 
directly measured V̇O
2max/peak), (2) maximal or submaximal exer-
cise testing without gas analysis, which used either exercise 
prediction equations to estimate CRF or the measured exercise 
performance (ie, indirect measures) or (3) non-
 ex
ercise predic-
tion equations for estimating CRF.
Outcome
Any health- related outcome such as all- cause or cause- specific 
mortality
, incident conditions related to physical risk factors, 
chronic conditions or mental health issues were included. Among 
populations with diagnosed chronic conditions, we included 
evidence on outcomes such as mortality or disease severity.
Study design
Only systematic reviews with meta- analyses that searched a 
minimum of two bibliographic 
databases and provided a sample 
search strategy were included. We also included meta-
 analyses 
that pooled data from 
primary prospective/retrospective cohort 
or case-
 control studies. These studies were the focus because 
of 
their ability to assess causality for observational research.
Publication status and language restriction
Only systematic reviews published in peer- reviewed journals in 
English, F
rench or Spanish (based on authors’ language capacity) 
were eligible. Conference abstracts or papers, commentaries, 
editorials, dissertations or grey literature were ineligible.
Time frame
Systematic reviews published during the past 20 years for the 
initial search.
Information sources
Five bibliographic databases, including OVID Medline, OVID 
Embase, Scopus, CINAHL and EBSCOhost SPORTDiscus, were 
searched from 1 January 2002 to 21 November 2022. The search 
was later updated from 1 November 2022 to 8 March 2024.
Search strategy
A research librarian (KM) created the search strategy in collab -
oration with the authorship team, and the final search was peer-

reviewed by an independent 
research librarian using the Peer 
Review of Electronic Search Strategies guidelines. 29 The search 
strategies for each database are available in online supplemental 
appendix 1. The reference lists of included papers were also 
searched for additional relevant systematic reviews.
Selection process
All records were imported into RefWorks where duplicates were 
removed using automated and manual methods. Records were 
Table 1 Study characteristics for general populations without known disea se at baseline and mortality outcomes
First author, 
year Population description Exposure description(s)
Range of 
follow-

up* Outcome(s)
Number of studies 
included in meta-

analysis)
Sample size 
included in 
meta-

analysis
AMSTAR2 
rating†
Aune, 2020
36 General populations of 
adults
High versus low 14.7–22 years Sudden cardiac 
mortality
2 57
 813 Critically low 
qualityPer 1-
 MET increase 2 57

813
Barry, 201452
Data only 
presented in 
supplement
General populations of 
adults
Normal weight fit 
versus normal weight 
unfit, overweight unfit, 
overweight fit, obese unfit 
and obese fit
7.7–16 years All-

cause 
mortality
10 92

986 Low quality
Barry, 201853
Data only 
presented in 
supplement
General populations of 
adults
Normal weight fit 
versus normal weight 
unfit, overweight unfit, 
overweight fit, obese unfit 
and obese fit
8.1–19.8 years CVD mortality 8 137

406 Low quality
Han, 202235 General populations of 
adults
High versus low 5.0–44.1 years All-
 cause 
mortality
19 2 187 550 Moderate 
qualityPer 1-
 MET increase 14 625

400
High versus low CVD mortality 13 1

952

352
Per 1-
 MET increase 10 392

240
High versus low All cancer 
mortality
11 409

422
Per 1-
 MET increase 10 409

594
Kodama, 200924 General populations of 
adults
High versus low 1.1–26 years All-
 cause 
mortality
15 31 010 Critically low
Per 1-
 MET increase 18 85

315
Laukkanen, 
2022
54
General populations of 
adults
High versus low 3.2–47.4 years All-
 cause 
mortality
37 2 255 441 High quality
Per 1-
 MET increase 10 360

131
Lee, 202055 General populations of 
adults
High versus low 11.5–49.8 years Lung cancer 
mortality
5 12
 758 Low quality
Qiu, 20216 General populations of 
adults
Per 1-
 MET increase (eCRF) 8.8–24 years All- cause 
mortality
7 154 015 Moderate 
quality
CVD mortality 6 174

075
*Data presented are for all the papers included in the systematic reviews and may include exposures other than CRF .
†Details on the AMSTAR2 quality assessment are available from Shea et al.
31
AMSTAR2, A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews 2; CRF , cardiorespiratory fitness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; MET, metabolic equivalent of task.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

4
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
imported into Covidence for further deduplication and record 
screening. Reviewers were not blinded to the study metadata 
when screening. The title and abstract from each record were 
screened by two of the following independent reviewers (JJL, 
SAP , CC-
 S, J-
 PC, BJF
, TM, BS and GRT) against the inclusion 
criteria. Full-
 text papers were 
obtained for each record that met 
the inclusion criteria or provided insufficient evidence to make 
a conclusive decision at the title and abstract stage. Conflicts 
during title and abstract screening automatically advanced to 
full-
 text screening. Each full-
 text record 
was screened by two of 
the following independent reviewers (JJL, SAP , CC-
 S, J-
 PC, BJF
, 
TM, BS and GRT) against the inclusion criteria. Conflicts at the 
full-
 text 
stage were resolved through discussion by two reviewers 
(JJL and SAP), with a third reviewer resolving disagreements 
(GRT).
Data collection process
Data extraction was completed in Covidence using a form that 
was piloted by the authorship group for accuracy. Data from the 
included studies were extracted by two of the following inde-
pendent reviewers (JJL, SAP , CC-
 S, 
J-
 PC, 
BJF, TM, FBO, BS 
and GRT). Conflicts were resolved by one reviewer (JJL), who 
contacted the reviewers who extracted the data when necessary 
to resolve conflicts.
Data items
The data extraction form included several items related to 
the demographic characteristics of the primary studies, the 
meta-
 analyses effect estimates and related statistics, and details 
for risk of bias and subgroup analyses.
Review quality
We extracted the original risk of bias assessment for each primary 
study, as reported by the study authors. Most of the included 
studies used the Newcastle-
 Ottawa Scale (NOS) to assess risk of 
bias for cohort 
studies.30 In the event that risk of bias was not 
assessed, a new assessment was conducted and verified by two 
reviewers using the NOS. We also assessed quality of the system-
atic reviews using the second edition of A MeaSurement T ool 
to Assess systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR2) checklist.
31 T wo of 
the following independent reviewers (JJL, SAP , CC-
 S, J-
 PC, BJF
, 
TM, FBO, BS and GRT) assessed review quality. Conflicts were 
resolved by one reviewer (JJL), with the reviewers who extracted 
the data contacted to resolve outstanding conflicts.
Effect measures
We presented pooled hazard ratios (HRs) or relative risks (RRs) 
for an incident event (ie, mortality or morbidity) across the 
included systematic reviews. We extracted data from models 
that compared high versus low CRF and those that examined 
the impact of a 1-
 MET higher level of CRF
.
Synthesis of data
We followed an outcome- centric approach, as outlined by 
Kho et al. 26 Our goal was to identify systematic reviews with 
Table 2 Study characteristics for general populations without known disea se at baseline and incident outcomes
First author, year
Population 
description
Exposure 
description(s) Range of follow-
 up* Outcome(s)
Number of studies 
included in meta-

analysis)
Sample size 
included in meta-

analysis AMST AR2 rating†
Aune, 202138 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 6.5–19.1 years Incidence of heart 
failure
6 1
 505 114 Moderate quality
Per 1-

MET 
increase
5 173

678
Cheng, 202237 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 4.3–25.7 years Incidence of 
hypertension
9 1 618
 067 Moderate quality
Per 1-

MET 
increase
9 1

618

067
Kandola, 201956 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 8 weeks to 42 years Incidence of 
depression
3 1
 145 655 Critically low 
quality
Kunutsor, 2023
57 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 7.2–27.9 years Incidence of 
chronic kidney 
disease
5 32
 447 Moderate quality
Lee, 202158 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 6–38 years Incidence of 
dementia
3 11
 694 Critically low 
quality
Pozuelo-

Carrascosa, 
201940
Data only presented in 
supplement
General 
populations of 
adult men only
High versus low 5–40 years Incidence of colon/
rectum, prostate, 
skin and all site 
cancer
4–5 23

350–28

262 Moderate quality
Tarp, 201959 General 
populations of 
adults
Per 1-
 MET 
increase
3–29 years Incidence of type 2 
diabetes
10 1 601 490 High quality
Wang, 202039 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 3.9–25.2 years Incidence of stroke 14 1
 409 340 Moderate quality
Per 1-

MET 
increase
9 Not reported
Xue, 202060 General 
populations of 
adults
High versus low 5.0–28.2 years Incidence of atrial 
fibrillation
7 2
 168 739 Critically low 
qualityPer 1-

MET 
increase
7 222

124
*Data presented are for all the papers included in the systematic reviews and may include exposures other than CRF .
†Details on the AMSTAR2 quality assessment are available from Shea et al.
31
AMSTAR2, A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews 2; CRF , cardiorespiratory fitness; MET, metabolic equivalent of task.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

5
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
non- overlapping primary studies for each outcome to avoid 
double counting evidence. When more than one eligible system-
atic review was identified for a single outcome, we calculated the 
corrected covered area (CCA) to assess the degree of overlap in 
the primary studies.
32
 CCA = N−r(
r∗c
)
−r 
Where, N
 is the total number of times a primary study 
appeared across reviews (inclusive of double counting), r is the 
number of unique primary studies and c is the number of system-
atic reviews included for the outcome.
The CCA was interpreted as slight (0%–5%), moderate 
(6%–10%), high (11%–15%) or very high (>15%). If the CCA 
was slight or moderate, we included multiple systematic reviews 
per outcome. If the CCA was high or very high, we selected the 
highest quality systematic review according to the AMSTAR2 
assessment. We included the most recent systematic review when 
reviews of the same outcome were rated as equal in quality.
Synthesis of results
For each health outcome, we reported evidence for apparently 
healthy and clinical populations separately. We summarised 
results using a narrative synthesis approach using summary of 
findings tables. Results were reported as described by the system-
atic review authors. Meta-
 analytic
al results, including the effect, 
confidence limits, number of studies and number of partici-
pants, were presented by outcome using a forest plot to allow 
for easy comparison between studies. RR values were taken to 
approximate the HR. When comparing high versus low CRF, 
we inverted the scale when studies compared low versus high by 
taking the reciprocal (ie, HR=2.00 was changed to HR=0.50). 
Dose−response values were rescaled to a 1-
 MET 
higher level of 
CRF when more than 1-
 MET was used or if the unit increase 
was in V
O2. We rescaled by taking the natural log of the HR, 
dividing or multiplying it to correspond with 1-
 MET
, and expo-
nentiating the result. Subgroup analyses for sex were described 
when available.
Certainty of the evidence assessment
For each outcome, the certainty of the evidence was assessed 
using a modified Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluations (GRADE) approach.
33 Obser -
vational cohort evidence began at ‘high’ certainty because 
randomised controlled trials were deemed not feasible for our 
research question.
34 The certainty of the evidence could be rated 
down based on five domains (ie, risk of bias, imprecision, incon-
sistency, indirectness and publication bias). See online supple-
mental table 1 for a GRADE decision rules table.
Equity, diversity and inclusion statement
Our research team included diversity across genders with 
representation from researchers at all career stages. We strati-
fied our results by sex which allowed use to identify the poten-
tial need for more diversity in this area of the literature. This 
stratification allowed us to discuss the overall generalisability 
of our results. The GRADE evaluation carried out in this 
study assessed the indirectness of the results. We downgraded 
evidence that did not demonstrate good global representation 
or did not provide a gender-
 balanced sample. R
educing indi-
rectness is important for ensuring the results are representative 
of the target population.
Table 3 Study characteristics for clinical populations with diagnosed chro nic disease at baseline and mortality outcomes
First author, year Population description
Exposure 
description(s)
Range of follow-

up* Outcome(s)
Number of studies 
included in meta-

analysis)
Sample size 
included in meta-

analysis
AMST
AR2 
rating†
Barbagelata, 202241 Patients with pulmonary 
hypertension
High versus low 1.6–6.2 years Mortality or 
heart/lung 
transplantation
9 986 Critically low 
quality
Cantone, 2023
61 Patients with amyloid 
cardiomyopathy
Per 1-
 MET increase 1.7–3.2 years All- cause mortality 3 233 Moderate quality
Ezzatvar, 202142 Patients with CVD High versus low 1.0–14.0 years All- cause mortality 11 22 274 Critically low 
qualityCVD mortality 4 5821
Ezzatvar, 2021
62 Patients with cancer High versus low 1–10 years All- cause mortality 9 4343 Low quality
Fuentes-

Abolafio, 
202063
Patients with heart failure High versus low 1 month to 20 years All- cause mortality 5 5170 High quality
Heart failure 
mortality
4 982
Lachman, 2018
64 Patients with coronary 
artery disease
Delayed HRR 
versus not delayed 
HRR
2.0–9.8 years All-
 cause mortality 
and hospitalisation
3 2146 Critically low 
quality
Morris, 2014
65 Patients with peripheral 
artery disease
High versus low 3.7–11.3 years 5-
 year all- cause 
mortality
3 2793 Critically low 
quality
5-

year CVD 
mortality
3 2793
Rocha, 202266 Patients with interstitial 
lung disease
High versus low 23 days to 15.5 years All-
 cause mortality 3 1908 Critically low 
quality
Yang, 2023
67 Patients with chronic 
kidney disease and end-

stage renal disease
High versus low 3.3 months to 12 
years
All- cause mortality 2 415 Critically low 
quality
*Data presented are for all the papers included in the systematic reviews and may include exposures other than CRF .
†Details on the AMSTAR2 quality assessment are available from Shea et al.
31
AMSTAR2, A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews 2; CRF , cardiorespiratory fitness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; HRR, heart rate recovery.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

6
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
RESULTS
We identified 9062 records after removing duplicates, assessed 
199 full-
 text 
papers, and excluded 165 papers during full-
 text 
screening, and 8 papers because 
of high or very high overlap 
based on the CCA calculation (see figure

1 and online supple-
mental appendix 2 for full texts with reasons for exclusion). 
The proportion of agreement between reviewers for title and 
abstract screening ranged from 95% to 100% while the agree-
ment for full-
 text screening ranged from 75% to 100%. W
e 
included 26 systematic reviews with meta-
 analyses representing 
over 20.9
 million observations from 199 unique 
cohort studies, 
including 21 mortality or incident chronic disease outcomes. We 
identified CCA values in the high or very high range for sudden 
cardiac mortality (CCA=33%; n=2), incident heart failure 
(33%; n=2), incident depression (50%; n=2), incident type 2 
diabetes (25%; n=4) and all-
 cause mortality among those living 
with heart failure
 (14%; n=3; see online supplemental appendix 
2 for more details). We included multiple systematic reviews for 
all-
 cause 
mortality because the CCA was moderate (10%; n=3).
T ables
 1–3
 describe the study characteristics. We identified 8 
systematic reviews that investigated mortality outcomes, with 
pooled data from 95 unique primary cohort studies. Nine system-
atic reviews investigated incident outcomes, pooling data from 
63 unique primary cohort studies. The remaining 9 systematic 
reviews investigated health-
 related outcomes among populations 
living 
with chronic conditions, which represented data from 51 
unique primary cohort studies. 11 reviews were of critically low 
quality, 4 were low, 8 were moderate and 3 were of high quality 
as assessed using the AMSTAR2 (see online supplemental table 
2). See online supplemental table 3 for a detailed summary of 
findings with the certainty of the evidence for each outcome.
Figure
 2
 illustrates results for CRF as a predictor of mortality 
outcomes, which included all- cause, CVD, sudden cardiac, all 
cancer and lung cancer mortality. When comparing high versus 
low CRF across all outcomes, there was a 41% (HR for all-

cause mortality 24=0.59; 95% CI 0.52 to 0.66) to 53% (HR 
for all-
 cause mortality 35=0.47; 95% CI 0.39 to 0.56) reduc-
tion in the risk of premature mortality. The certainty of the 
evidence was assessed as very low-
 to-
 moderate, mainly due to 
serious indirectness (ie, 
most studies only included male partic-
ipants). In assessing the dose–response relationship, a 1-
 MET 
higher level 
of CRF was associated with a 7% (HR for all cancer 
mortality35=0.93; 95% CI 0.91 to 0.96) to 51% (HR for sudden 
cardiac mortality 36=0.49; 95% CI 0.33 to 0.73) reduction in 
the risk of premature mortality. The certainty of the evidence 
ranged from very low-
 to-
 moderate, 
largely due to serious indi-
rectness from a large proportion of male-
 only studies. 
Sex differ-
ences were similar between outcomes with larger CIs for females 
because of smaller samples (see online supplemental figure 1). 
For example, there were 1
 858
 274 male participants compared 
with 180
 202 female participants for all-
 cause mortality
.
Figure

3 describes results for CRF as a predictor of newly 
diagnosed chronic conditions, including: hypertension, heart 
failure, stroke, atrial fibrillation, dementia, chronic kidney 
disease, depression and type 2 diabetes. Online supplemental 
figure 2 describes results for all cancer (male only), lung 
cancer (male only), colon/rectum cancer (male only) and pros -
tate cancer. When comparing high versus low CRF, there was 
a 37% (HR for incident hypertension
37=0.63; 95% CI 0.56 
to 0.70) to 69% (HR for incident heart failure 38=0.31; 95% 
CI 0.19 to 0.49) reduction in the risk of incident conditions. 
The certainty of this evidence was rated as very low-
 to-
 low 

Figure 2 HRs for each mortality outcome in apparently healthy populations a t baseline for high versus low CRF and per 1- MET increase in 
CRF
. Estimates from Laukkanen (2022), Han (2022), Kodama (2009) and Aune (2020) were reported as RR, the remaining studies were reported as 
HR. Qui (2021) reported estimates from self-
 reported CRF
. Kodama (2009) reported low versus high CRF which were inverted for this study. CRF , 
cardiorespiratory fitness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eCRF , estimated non-
 exercise cardiorespiratory fitness;
 GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, 
Assessment, Development and Evaluations; MET, metabolic equivalent of task; NA, not applicable; NR, not reported; RR, relative
 risk.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

7
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
largely due to inconsistency and indirectness (ie, high hetero-
geneity that could not be described by subgroup analysis and 
largely male populations). The dose–response relationship per 
1-
 MET higher level of CRF was associated with a 3% (HR for 
incident stroke39=0.97; 95% CI 0.96 to 0.98) to 18% (HR for 
incident heart failure 38=0.82; 95% CI 0.79 to 0.84) reduction 
in the risk of incident conditions. The certainty of the evidence 
ranged from very low-
 to-
 low due to inconsistency and indirect
-
ness. Only two studies reported results for females separately. 
High versus low CRF was more protective for incident stroke 
and type 2 diabetes among females compared with males (online 
supplemental figure 2). Among men, there was a null association 
between high versus low CRF for prostate cancer (HR=1.15; 
95% CI 1.00 to 1.30).
40
Figure 4 highlights results comparing high versus low CRF 
among individuals 
living with chronic conditions. There was a 
19% (HR for adverse events among those living with pulmonary 
hypertension
41=0.81; 95% CI 0.78 to 0.85) to 73% (HR for 
cardiovascular mortality among those living with CVD42=0.27; 
95% CI 0.16 to 0.48) reduction in the risk of all-
 cause 
and 
type-
 specific 
mortality. Comparing delayed versus not delayed 
heart rate recovery was associated with an 83% reduced risk of 
adverse events among those living with coronary artery disease. 
The certainty of the evidence for mortality in those living with 
a chronic condition was rated as very low-
 to-
 low largely due to 
risk 
of bias, indirectness and imprecision (ie, low-
 quality 
studies, 
mainly male participants and small sample sizes). No evidence 
examining sex differences were available. See online supple-
mental table 3 for a detailed summary of findings.
DISCUSSION
This overview of systematic reviews demonstrated that CRF is 
a strong and consistent predictor of risk across many mortality 
outcomes in the adult general population. Among populations 
living with chronic conditions such as cancer, heart failure and 
CVD, this study showed better prognosis for those with higher 
CRF. We also demonstrated that low CRF is an important risk 
factor for developing future chronic conditions such as hyper -
tension, heart failure, stoke, atrial fibrillation, dementia and 
depression. Given that we summarised evidence from cohort 
studies, and randomised controlled trials cannot be used in 
our investigation, the results of this study may signal a causal 
relationship between CRF and future health outcomes. We also 
found a significant dose–response effect showing protection for 
every 1-
 MET 
higher level of CRF. This evidence further supports 
1-
 MET 
as an MCID for CRF and could be considered as a target 
for interventions. The strength and consistency of the evidence 
across a wide range of outcomes supports the importance of 
CRF for clinical assessment and public health surveillance.
Several studies have identified the need for the routine 
measurement of CRF in clinical and public health practice.
11 43 
For instance, a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association concluded that healthcare providers should assess 
CRF during annual routine clinical visits using submaximal tests 
(eg, treadmill, cycling or bench stepping tests) or self-
 report esti
-
mates and that patients living with chronic conditions should 
have CRF measured regularly using a symptom-
 limited direct 
measure.11 There are several benefits to regular measurement of 
CRF in clinical practice. First, CRF is an important risk factor 

Figure 3 HRs for each incident outcome in apparently healthy populations a t baseline for high versus low CRF and per 1- MET increase in CRF . 
Note: Estimates from Cheng (2022), Aune (2021), Wang (2020), Xue (2020), Tarp (2019) and Kunutsor (2023) were reported as RR, the remaining 
studies were reported as HR. Kandola (2019) reported estimates for low versus high which were inverted for this study. The estimates from Tarp 
(2019) are fully adjusted for adiposity. Aune (2021) was reported per 5-
 MET increase which we converted to 1-
 MET increase for this study.
 CRF , 
cardiorespiratory fitness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations; MET, 
metabolic equivalent of task; NA, not applicable; NR, not reported; RR, relative
 risk.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

8
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
that provides additional information beyond traditional risk 
factors such as blood pressure, total cholesterol and smoking 
status.
44 Second, given the strong link with habitual physical 
activity, CRF could be a valuable tool to help guide exercise 
prescription. In those with low CRF (defined based on age, sex 
and health status), large relative improvements can be attained 
through additional moderate physical activity (ie, brisk walking 
at a heart rate of 50% of peakO
2).45 The largest health benefits 
have been observed when individuals move from being unfit to 
fit.
46 Lastly, CRF measured using field- based tests are easy to 
implement with 
a variety of tests that could be adapted to suit 
space and time limitations.
Areas of future work
Applying the GRADE approach to evaluate the certainty of the 
evidence helped identify several important gaps in the literature. 
Nearly all the outcomes identified in this study were down-
graded due to the evidence being generated largely from samples 
comprising males. Although an increase in female samples would 
help improve the certainty of the evidence, it likely would not 
impact the magnitude of the observed effects because the bene-
fits of CRF were similar for males and females in our study (see 
online supplemental figures 1,2) and other large cohort studies.
47 
There is also a need for higher-
 quality 
studies with larger 
samples sizes in clinical populations, as many of the outcomes 
were downgraded due to primary studies with high risk of bias, 
low sample sizes (<4000 participants), and inconsistencies in the 
measurement of CRF across studies. Improving the evidence for 
CRF in clinical populations remains an important research gap. 
For instance, outcomes in clinical populations with a serious or 
very serious risk of bias were often rated this way due to a lack 
of adequate control for confounding, including a lack of adjust-
ment for age, sex, and body mass.
In addition to the need for higher-
 quality 
studies with greater 
samples in more diverse populations including females, we did 
not identify any systematic reviews that explored the association 
between CRF and breast cancer
48 or mental health outcomes 
beyond incident depression and dementia, as an example. These 
outcomes present important areas for future work. Finally, future 
studies would benefit from repeated longitudinal measures of 
CRF to further establish causality.
Implications for clinical practice
This study further demonstrates the importance of including 
CRF measurement in regular clinical practice. For every 1-
 MET 
(3.5
 mL/kg/min) 
higher level of CRF, we identified substantial 
reductions in the risk of all-
 cause, 
CVD and cancer mortality. 
We also identified significant reductions in the risk of incident 
hypertension, heart failure, stroke, atrial fibrillation and type 2 
diabetes per higher MET. For most, a 1-
 MET higher level of 
CRF is 
attainable through a regular aerobic exercise programme. 
For example, in a large population-
 based 
observational study of 
over 90
 000 participants, nearly 30% were able 
to increase their 
CRF by 1-
 MET (median follow-
 up was 6.3 years) without inter-
vention.49 However, for some, improvements as small as 0.5- 
MET
s may substantially benefit health.50 51
Given the strength of the predictive utility of CRF across 
many health outcomes, CRF would be a valuable risk stratifi-
cation tool in clinical practice. Furthermore, the predictive 
strength of CRF is maintained regardless of age, sex and race.
47 
Through regular CRF measurement, clinicians could better iden-
tify patients at greater risk of premature mortality, initiating the 
need for targeted exercise prescription. Improvements in CRF 
through regular physical activity results in a proportional reduc-
tion in mortality risk, regardless of the presence of other major 
risk factors such as higher body mass index, hypertension, type 

Figure 4 HRs for health outcomes in patients living with chronic conditions a t baseline for high versus low CRF and delayed versus not delayed 
HRR. Estimates from Morris (2014) were reported as RR, the remaining estimates were reported as HR. Yang (2023), Fuentes-
 Abolafio (2020),

Morris (2014), Rocha (2022) and Lachman (2018) reported estimates as low versus high which were inverted for this study. Cantone (2023) was 
reported per 1-
 unit 
VO2 increase which we converted to 1- MET increase for this study. Adverse events for Lachman (2018) were all- cause mortality, 
cardiovascular mortality and hospitalisations for congestive heart failure. CRF , cardiorespiratory fitness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; GRADE, Grading 
of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations; HRR, heart
 rate recovery;
 MET, metabolic equivalent of task; NA, not applicable; NR, 
not reported; RR, relative
 risk.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on April 20, 2026 from 9 April 2024. on Br J Sports Med: first published as

9
Lang JJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;0:1–11. doi:
Systematic review
2 diabetes, dyslipidaemia, or smoking. 49 There is an important 
need for clinical and public health guidelines around the assess-
ment, interpretation of results and MCID of CRF across age, sex 
and clinical populations.
Strengths and limitations
Our paper has several strengths, including a focus on pooled 
meta-
 analyses from cohort studies, assessment of the certainty 
of the evidence 
using a modified GRADE, and an evaluation of 
the systematic review quality using AMSTAR2. Our study iden-
tifies gaps where new evidence is needed across a broad range 
of health outcomes. However, this study is not without limita -
tions. As in any overview, the quality of the data is restricted 
to the included papers. In our case, heterogeneity was high 
for many of the included meta-
 analyses and was 
often not 
explained by subgroup analyses. We also identified low-
 to-
 very 
low certainty of the evidence for most 
outcomes, suggesting the 
need for higher-
 quality 
studies in this research area including 
adequate adjustment for confounding and greater representation 
of females. The evidence was also limited to studies examining 
associations between a single measure of CRF and prospective 
health outcomes.
CONCLUSION
Our findings showed that high CRF is strongly associated with 
lower risk of premature mortality, incident chronic condi-
tions (ie, hypertension, heart failure, stroke, atrial fibrillation, 
dementia and depression), and poor prognosis in those with 
existing chronic conditions. The consistency of the evidence 
across a variety of health outcomes demonstrates the importance 
of CRF and the need to incorporate this measure in routine clin-
ical and public health practice. Future studies should focus on 
outcomes with limited evidence and where the certainty of the 
evidence was rated as very low by improving study quality.
Author affiliations
1Centre for Surveillance and Applied Research, Public Health Agency of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
2School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
3Alliance for Research in Exercise, Nutrition and Activity (ARENA), Allied Health 
and Human Performance, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia
4Health Library, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
5Department of Physical Education and Sports, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Sport and 
Health University Research Institute (iMUDS), University of Granada; CIBEROBN, 
ISCIII, Granada, Andalucía, Spain
6Stanford University, Department of Cardiology; and Veterans Affair Palo Alto Health 
Care System, Palo Alto, California, USA
7Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
8Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada
9Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, 
Australia
10Division of Medical Sciences, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince 
George, British Columbia, Canada
11Fargo VA Healthcare System, Fargo, North Dakota, USA
12Department of Health, Nutrition, and Exercise Sciences, North Dakota State 
University, Fargo, North Dakota, USA
13Department of Geriatrics, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, North Dakota, 
USA
14Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
X Justin J Lang @JustinJLang, Stephanie A Prince @SPrinceWare and Ben Singh 
@bensinghphd
Acknowledgements
 W
e would like to acknowledge the support of Valentine Ly, 
MLIS, Research Librarian at the University of Ottawa for her help with translating 
and conducting the search strategy in CINAHL and SPORTDiscus. We would also like 
to acknowledge the Health Library at Health Canada and the Public Health Agency 
of Canada for their support in constructing and carrying out the search strategy for 
MEDLINE, Embase and Scopus. The PRESS peer-
 review of the search str
ategy was 
carried out by Shannon Hayes, MLIS, research librarian, from the Health Library at 
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada. We would also like to thank 
Joses Robinson and Iryna Demchenko for their help with the paper.
Contributors
 JJL,
 GRT and SAP conceptualised and planned the study design. JJL 
and SAP led the study. JJL accepts full responsibility for the work and/or the conduct 
of the study, had access to the data, and controlled the decision to publish. All 
coauthors contributed to article screening. JJL and SAP wrote the first draft of the 
article. All coauthors reviewed, revised and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
 T
he authors have not declared a specific grant for this research 
from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-
 for
-
 profit sectors
. Dr. 
Ortega is supported by the Grant PID2020-
 120249RB-
 I00 funded by MCIN/
AEI/ and by the 
Andalusian Government (Junta de 
Andalucía, Plan Andaluz de Investigación, ref. P20_00124). Dr. Cadenas-
 Sanchez 
is supported by a gr
ant from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska Curie grant agreement No 
101028929. Dr. Fraser is supported by a National Heart Foundation of Australia 
Postdoctoral Fellowship (106588).
Disclaimer
 T
he content and views expressed in this articles are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Government of Canada.
Competing interests
 None declared.
P
atient consent for publication
 Not applicable
.
Provenance and peer review
 Not commissioned;
 externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement
 Data are av
ailable on reasonable request.
Supplemental material
 T
his content has been supplied by the author(s). 
It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not 
have been peer-
 reviewed.
 Any opinions or recommendations discussed are 
solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all 
liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. 
Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the 
accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local 
regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and 
is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and 
adaptation or otherwise.
Open access
 T
his is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-
 NC 4.0) license
, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
 commercially,

and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-
 commercial
. See: 
ORCID iDs
Justin J Lang 
Stephanie A Prince 
Cristina Cadenas-

Sanchez 
Jean-

Philippe Chaput 
Brooklyn J Fraser 
Taru Manyanga 
Francisco B Ortega 
Ben Singh 
Grant R Tomkinson