Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental Gerontology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero
Review
Impact of calorie restriction on energy metabolism in humans
Jasper Most a,b, Leanne Maree Redman a,⁎
a Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge 70808, LA, USA
b Nutrition and Movement Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center+, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER Maastricht, the Netherlands
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Adaptive thermogenesis
Calorie restriction
Energy e ﬃ ciency
Energy requirements
Weight loss
Weight regain
ABSTRACT
Calorie restriction (CR) is the most potent, non-pharmacological intervention to support metabolic health. The
eﬀects of calorie restriction exceed weight loss. Consistent throughout many studies, calorie restriction induces a
reduction in energy expenditure that is larger than the loss of metabolic mass, i.e. fat-free mass and fat mass, can
explain. Per prevailing theories of mammalian aging, this disproportionate reduction in metabolic rate, de ﬁned
as metabolic adaptation, reduces oxidative damage and thereby delays age-associated declines in physiological
function. The aim of this narrative review is to investigate the origins of CR-induced metabolic adaptation. From
a physiological standpoint this likely relates to the composition of body weight loss, reductions in insulin se-
cretion, thyroid and leptin concentrations, and increased mitochondrial energy eﬃciency. Behavioral factors
including physical activity and eating behaviors likely also play a role, speci ﬁcally to prevent weight regain.
Future studies are required to understand the interindividual di ﬀerences in the response to CR, e.g. by sex,
physical activity, or mitochondrial capacity, and to assess the long-term implications of CR for weight regain.
1. Introduction
Calorie restriction (CR) is the most potent non-pharmacological
intervention to attenuate aging and prevent chronic metabolic diseases
(Heilbronn and Ravussin, 2003 ). CR is deﬁ ned as a sustained reduction
in energy intake from pre-intervention energy requirements while
maintaining su ﬃ cient nutrient supply to achieve weight stability. In-
itially CR induces weight loss and over time energy expenditure (EE)
declines until it eventually matches energy intake and the new lower
body weight plateaus.
The rationale to undertake CR extends beyond the goal of weight
loss. The primary rationale for performing CR is to reduce metabolic
rate. Metabolic rate is the energy expended by an organism at rest in
order to maintain body functions including metabolic homeostasis,
breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, cellular regeneration, main-
tenance of ion gradients, and activity of the nervous system. Per the
‘rate of living ’ theory ( Sacher and Du ﬀy, 1979), the metabolic rate per
lifespan is a species-speci ﬁc characteristic and therefore individuals
with higher metabolic rates have shorter lifespans ( Sohal and Allen,
1985). This theory was developed upon observations of negative asso-
ciations between mammalian metabolic rate (per body weight per day)
and lifespan (R
2 = 0.26) . It should be noted that
this theory may only apply within species but not between species
.
Of the oxygen consumed by mitochondria, the vast majority is uti-
lized for ATP production, but 1– 3% generate reactive oxygen species
. The accumulation of reactive oxygen species disrupts
molecular and cellular structures and may therefore explain the age-
associated impairments in metabolic homeostasis and function
(Harman, 1956; Lopez-Otin et al., 2013). Thus, a CR-induced slowing of
the metabolic rate is hypothesized to improve metabolic health and
extend lifespan via a reduction in oxidative damage to cells and tissues.
The aim of this narrative review is to describe the theoretical fra-
mework for the e ﬀect of CR on energy metabolism including resting EE,
physical activity-related EE and total daily EE in non-obese populations,
and to discuss the evidence for and against the hypothesis that CR re-
duces metabolic rate. First, changes in composition of body weight loss,
metabolic mediators of CR, and energy e ﬃ ciency in mitochondria are
reviewed. Second, the interaction between CR and physical activity and
ﬁnally the implications of a reduced metabolic rate for weight regain
are discussed.
2. Measurement of calorie restriction and energy metabolism
Due to the limitations with self-reporting methods to estimate en-
ergy intake, energy intake requirements for community-dwelling

Received 17 December 2019; Received in revised form 6 February 2020; Accepted 9 February 2020
Abbreviations: CR, Calorie restriction; EE, Energy expenditure; FFM, Fat-free mass; FM, Fat mass
⁎ Corresponding author at: Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge 70808, LA, USA.
E-mail addresses: jasper.most@pbrc.edu, jasper.most@maastrichtuniversity.nl (J. Most), leanne.redman@pbrc.edu (L.M. Redman).
Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
Available online 11 February 2020
0531-5565/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T

individuals are best assessed using the energy intake-balance method.
Per First Law of Thermodynamics, energy intake during an observation
period equals the sum of total daily EE and the changes in body energy
stores. Total daily EE is most objectively measured using the doubly
labeled water technique . Changes in body
energy stores are approximated as change in tissue masses usually in
two compartments (i.e. fat-free mass and fat mass) between two points
in time (i.e. the start and conclusion of an intervention) multiplied by
their respective energy densities (e.g. 1100 kcal/kg for fat-free mass
and 9300 kcal/kg for fat mass) . Pre-intervention
energy requirements are deﬁ ned as energy intake during weight
maintenance, and therefore energy requirements equal total daily EE.
CR is measured as the di ﬀerence between baseline energy requirements
and energy intake during a prescribed time period. Alternative methods
to estimate energy requirements and hence calorie restriction are based
predictions for total daily EE based on body weight or body composi-
tion of the individual (TDEE (kcal/d) = 2189 + 19.6 * weight (kg) -
17.6 * age (yr) - 555 (for females), r
2 = 0.75; or TDEE (kcal/d) = 1630
+ 33.4 * FFM (kg) + 1.9 * FM (kg) - 16.9 * age (yr) - 173 (for females),
r
2 = 0.78) ( Racette et al., 2012 ; Redman et al., 2009 ).
Assessing the e ﬀects of CR on energy metabolism requires distinc-
tion between individual components of total daily EE. Total daily EE is
partitioned into the energy expended at rest (resting EE), in response to
meals (diet-induced thermogenesis), and to support physical activity
(activity-related EE). Resting EE is measured by indirect calorimetry
either with a bedside ventilated hood system, or in a whole-room me-
tabolic chamber ( Lam and Ravussin, 2016 ). Diet-induced thermogen-
esis can be measured with the same methodologies performed before
and after consumption of a meal, yet is routinely assumed to equate to
10% of total daily EE . Activity-related EE then
is calculated as the di ﬀerence between total daily EE and resting EE plus
diet-induced thermogenesis.
3. Calorie restriction and weight loss
The most important consideration for the study of CR is the re-
quirement for adequate nutrition including su ﬃ cient intake of macro-
nutrients and micronutrients. This necessity is best demonstrated by the
‘Minnesota Starvation Study ’ a landmark study of severe CR by Keys
et al. (1950) . In this study, ~40% CR was induced by dietary restriction
and increased exercise. The young men lost ~25% of body weight of
which 70% was fat mass (FM) and 30% fat-free mass (FFM). The diet
was designed to mimic conditions of warfare and therefore was de ﬁ-
cient in many nutrients. The malnourished CR diet led to chronic
weakness, reduced aerobic capacity, and severe painful lower limb
edema . Furthermore, various abnormal psycholo-
gical behaviors were observed included severe emotional distress,
confusion, apathy, depression, hysteria, hypochondriasis, suicidal
thoughts, and loss of sex drive.
In contrast, the largest and best controlled clinical studies of CR in
non-obese individuals prescribed CR of 25% (12 –18% CR achieved) and
intentionally ensured adequate intake of micronutrients by provision of
a vitamin, mineral and calcium supplement to subjects ( Rickman et al.,
2011; Rochon et al., 2011). With this moderate level of CR and nutri-
tional adequacy, there was no increased frequency of adverse events
compared to individuals continuing their usual diet ( Ravussin et al.,
2015; Romashkan et al., 2016 ). Interventions using very low calorie-
diets or bariatric surgery achieve larger degrees of CR (up to 70%) and
without observing adverse e ﬀects as described in the Minnesota Star-
vation Study. These approaches are prescribed to patients with obesity
and the intent to induce severe energy deﬁ cit and weight loss and are
complemented with multivitamin supplements. Nutritional adequacy is
thereby ensured despite low energy intake. While these CR approaches
may be perceived to help to understand metabolic e ﬀects of CR-induced
weight loss, it should be considered that the metabolic e ﬀects of such
extreme energy deﬁ cits may di ﬀer from those observed during more
modest and sustainable degrees of CR.
Models describing the impact of reduced energy intake on the
consequential changes in EE, and impact of the energy de ﬁcit on FM
and FFM have been generated by Guo et al. (2018) . These models have
been largely derived from data of the CALERIE studies ( Heilbronn et al.,
2006; Racette et al., 2012; Ravussin
 et al., 2015; Redman et al., 2009;
Redman et al., 2018) where all subjects followed diets with the same
relative energy deﬁ cit (25% reduction in intake from the energy re-
quirement for weight maintenance) and were forced to achieve a new
energy balance (or weight maintenance) after 12 months of CR initia-
tion. A simpli ﬁed model of this data is presented in Fig. 1.
The simple model of CR-induced changes in energy balance and
hence weight and EE shows that at the onset of a CR diet (Phase 1), the
reduction in energy intake occurs more rapidly than the reduction in EE
and hence an acute energy deﬁ cit occurs inducing weight loss. EE is
proportional to body mass , and thus with weight
loss, EE decreases, too (Phase 2). Consequently, over time, energy in-
take and EE approximate each other until they reach energy balance
(Phase 3), notably at a reduced level from baseline energy intake and at
reduced body weight. The observed reductions in EE may exceed the
extent that would be explained by the reduction in body mass. This
suggests that observed reductions in EE during CR are independent of a
change in FFM and may be attributed to a decline in the metabolic rate
per unit of mass or to a reduction in physical activity. These physio-
logical or behavioral adaptations to CR ,respectively, are believed to
explain the intra-individual variation in weight loss and weight loss
maintenance.
To study metabolic and behavioral adaptations that occur with CR,
changes in EE should be evaluated independent of the changes in body
composition. The common practice for assessing the metabolic e ﬀects
of CR independent of body composition is to measure the change in EE
induced by the intervention and to compare it to the change in EE
which would be expected on the basis of the change in body compo-
sition observed . To derive the expected change in
EE, a linear regression model of the respective study cohort is devel-
oped using the baseline (prior to CR) data. In the baseline model, EE
(dependent variable, y) is explained by independent variables (x), or
Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed model of energy balance components during calorie restric-
tion interventions. Calorie restriction (CR) is initiated at month 0 by prescribing
75% energy intake (EI) as compared to the baseline energy intake requirements
(100%). Adherence to the CR regimen ( ‘Adhered EI ’) is highest during the ﬁrst
3 months (~21%), and declines to ~10% after 12 months. The compensatory
decrease in total daily EE (TDEE) is smaller than the decrease in energy intake
(EI), which induces an energy de ﬁcit (in grey) and weight loss (Phase 1 and 2).
After 12 months, the CR daily energy intake approximates the total daily EE and
weight is maintained on a 12% reduced level of energy balance, which de ﬁnes
CR during weight maintenance (Phase 3).
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
2

factors with well-known e ﬀects on EE. Independent variables typically
included are body mass or body composition (FFM and FM), sex, age
and sometimes race. For resting EE, coe ﬃ cients for FFM are
17–27 kcal/kg and 2– 5 kcal/kg for FM ( Hall, 2010; Martin et al., 2007;
Ravussin et al., 2015; Redman et al., 2018 ). Imputing data values of the
independent variables included in the model from individual subjects
provides an estimate for EE that is expected based on the body mass
composition, and while also considering age, sex and race. Therefore, if
the relationship between EE and body mass/composition remains
constant, the linear regression model approach allows one to determine
how EE would change for a given individual as a function of weight
change over time.
4. Metabolic adaptation
A decline in EE which is beyond what would be expected relative to
the changes body mass (or composition) is termed metabolic adapta-
tion. In Table 1, we summarize metabolic adaptation observed in re-
sponse to di ﬀerent CR and weight loss intervention studies. Metabolic
adaptation was the primary outcome of the CALERIE studies and was
investigated after 3 and 6 months of 25% prescribed CR in CALERIE
Phase 1, and after 12 and 24 months in CALERIE Phase 2. As hy-
pothesized, after 6– 24 months of CR, metabolic adaptation was ob-
served during sleep ( Heilbronn et al., 2006 ; Redman et al., 2018 ), at
rest ( Martin et al., 2007; Ravussin et al., 2015 ), over 24 h in the con-
ﬁned environment of the room calorimeter ( Heilbronn et al., 2006;
Redman et al., 2018 ), and over 14-days in free-living conditions
(Ravussin et al., 2015 ; Redman et al., 2009 ; Redman et al., 2018). The
metabolic adaptation observed during sleep, which is arguably the most
reproducible measure of metabolic rate, was 8% at 3 months, 7% at
6 months, 6% at 12 months, and 5% at 24 months. In contrast the
metabolic adaptation in free-living conditions was almost double at
each time point across the 24-month period (13% at 3 months, 7% at
6 months, 8% at 12 months and 9% at 24 months, respectively). The
larger metabolic adaptation in free-living conditions suggests that the
culprit of such adaptations is not only changes in metabolic processes
but also compensations in behaviors likely occurring in an e ﬀort to
conserve energy. Importantly, body weight loss occurred only during
the ﬁrst 6–12 months, after which time it was maintained. This implies
that metabolic adaptation is not exclusive to periods of chronic energy
deﬁciency, but that it persists in energy balance. The CALERIE data also
suggests that metabolic adaptation is related to the degree of CR (21%
CR achieved during the ﬁrst 3 months, 18% during the ﬁrst 6 months,
11% from month 6 to 24).
The cause of metabolic adaptation appears to be speci ﬁc to calorie
restriction because studies that demonstrated exercise-induced weight
loss did not observe metabolic adaptation ( Hopkins et al., 2014;
Jennings et al., 2009; Karstoft et al., 2017 ; Lee
et al., 2009; Mourier
et al., 1997). The energy deﬁ cits induced in these studies were small
(~250 kcal/d), so an alternative hypothesis might be that larger energy
deﬁcits are needed to induce a metabolic adaptation. Indeed these
studies observed marked inter-subject variability in metabolic adapta-
tion, and one reported that metabolic adaptation was related to changes
in energy intake . This later study supports the
argument that reduced energy intake, i.e. calorie restriction, rather
than an energy de ﬁcit induces metabolic adaptation.
In a pilot study comparing the e ﬀects of CR
vs alternate day fasting (ADF), mass-adjusted RMR was reduced more
by CR as compared to ADF, despite a smaller energy deﬁ cit (28% vs
47%) and comparable reductions in fat and lean masses. This data also
implies that a continuity of CR is needed to promote metabolic adap-
tation, whereas intermittent periods of CR and ad libitum eating may
ameliorate the decline in RMR. Furthermore, a recent study showed
that ADF for 4 weeks did not a ﬀect RMR, although the intervention led
to reductions in energy intake ( −37%) and body weight ( −5%)
. Similar ﬁndings have been made for the com-
parison between continuous CR and CR implemented every other week
. While the intermittent fasting approach achieved
more pronounced weight loss, RMR declined less, after adjustment for
changes in body mass and the mechanism for this di ﬀerence is un-
explored.
To our knowledge, CALERIE is the only study in which metabolic
Table 1
Metabolic adaptation in response to di ﬀerent weight loss interventions.
Duration Intervention Change in body weight Metabolic adaptation
Normal weight and overweight
CALERIE Phase 1 3 months 25% CR −7% 8%
3 months 25% CR, (diet+exercise) −5% 5%
3 months Low calorie diet −14% 3%#
6 months 25% CR −10% 7%
6 months 25% CR, (diet+exercise) −10% 7%
6 months Low calorie diet −14% 4%#
CALERIE Phase 2 12 months 25% CR −13% 6%
24 months 25% CR −12% 5%
Biosphere-2 24 months Low calorie diet −9k g 6 %#
Overweight and obesity
Revisited MSS, men 3 weeks 50% CR −4k g 4 %
Revisited MSS, women 13 weeks Low calorie diet −10 kg 4%
Obesity
Biggest Loser 30 days Diet & exercise −59 kg 11%
6 months Diet & exercise −49 kg 17%
7 months Gastric bypass −36 kg 9%
BARIA 12 months Gastric bypass −36% 8%
12 months Sleeve gastrectomy −33% 11%
12 months Gastric band −16% 12%
12 months Low calorie diet −4% 4% #
24 months Gastric bypass −42 kg 15%
24 months Gastric band −19 kg 12%#
24 months Sleeve gastrectomy −37 kg 20%
LABS 6 months Surgery (88% gastric bypass) −31 kg 8%
Changes in body weight and metabolic adaptation, measured in rest, in calorie restriction (CR) studies, and weight loss studies, induced by low calorie diet and
bariatric surgery.
#indicates that metabolic adaptation as compared to the control group did not reach statistical signi ﬁcance. BARIA, Bariatric Surgery and Weight
Loss on Energy Metabolism and Insulin Sensitivity; CALERIE, Comprehensive Assessment of Long-Term E ﬀects of Reducing Intake of Energy; LABS, Longitudinal
Assessment of Bariatric Surgery; MSS, Minnesota Starvation Study.
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
3

adaptation was prospectively assessed in a randomized, controlled in-
tervention of CR in individuals without obesity. Our ﬁndings of a CR-
induced metabolic adaptation is supported by comparable observations
of CR induced by diet-induced weight loss including the revisited
Minnesota Starvation study in men , and women
(Bosy-Westphal et al., 2013), the ‘Biggest Loser’ competition (Fothergill
et al., 2016 ; Knuth et al., 2014 ) as well as the BARIA ( Tam et al., 2016a ;
Tam et al., 2016b ), and LABS bariatric surgery
trials.
5. Mechanisms of metabolic adaptations
Collectively, these studies indicate that reductions in EE induced by
CR are larger than changes in FFM and FM explain. Likely mechanisms
of metabolic adaptations include changes in the composition of FFM,
slowing of energy costly, metabolic processes, or an increased e ﬃ ciency
converting consumed oxygen and energy rich-substrates into cellular
available energy (ATP).
5.1. Fat-free mass composition
The simplest, reliable and cost-e ﬀective approaches for ascertain-
ment of body composition result in the distinction of mass in two
compartments; FFM and FM. In contrast, a more detailed assessment of
FFM such as measurement of organ mass including skeletal muscle,
liver, kidney, heart, spleen, and brain is complex and requires costly,
intensive magnetic resonance imaging protocols and sophisticated data
analysis pipelines. A limitation to the simple distinction of mass in two
compartments is the assumption that the entire FFM compartment
changes proportionally during weight loss, e.g. muscle mass decreases
and to the same extent as the liver. Changes in the contribution of
diﬀerent organ masses to the overall FFM may explain inter-individual
diﬀerences in metabolic rate with CR because, as Pits (1962) and later
Forbes (1993) proposed, diﬀerent organs have di ﬀerent metabolic rates
(Heymsﬁeld, 2018 ; Heymsﬁeld et al., 2019 ; Muller et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2011a ). Indeed, when including mass of the liver, kidney, heart,
spleen, brain, skeletal muscle and adipose tissue mass obtained from
whole-body MRI to predict EE, more variation in metabolic rate at-
tributed to age ( Geisler et al., 2016; He et al., 2009 ; Heymsﬁeld et al.,
2012), sex ( Wang et al., 2011b ) or race ( Gallagher et al., 2006 ; Javed
et al., 2010 ) is explained compared to FFM alone. Thus, a dispropor-
tionate decline in the mass of organs, especially the high metabolic rate
organs such as liver, kidney and skeletal muscle would explain a steeper
decline in metabolic rate, and hence metabolic adaptation.
In the 24-month CALERIE Phase 2 ancillary study at Pennington
Biomedical Research Center, LA ( clinicaltrials.gov: NCT02695511),
such
data has been acquired, but changes in organ size are not yet
published. Shorter-term studies of diet-induced weight loss in patients
with overweight and obesity support the hypothesis that di ﬀerential
change in organ mass explains proportion of observed metabolic
adaptation. In a replication of the Minnesota Starvation Study, Muller
et al. (2015) found that after three weeks of 50% CR, metabolic
adaptation adjusted for changes FFM and FM, was 108 kcal/d or 48% of
the decrease in resting EE. Within FFM they observed that mass of
skeletal muscle ( −5%), liver ( −13%), and kidneys ( −8%) decreased
diﬀerently. Accounting for speci ﬁc changes in FFM composition further
explained 36 kcal of the metabolic adaptation, leaving 72 kcal/d as the
true, mass-adjusted metabolic adaptation. Comparable ﬁndings were
reported in a study of overweight and obese women after 13 weeks on a
low calorie diet ( Bosy-Westphal et al., 2009 ). Reductions in skeletal
muscle ( −3.1%), heart ( −5.2%), liver ( −4.4%), and kidney ( −6.1%)
were noted alongside a small yet signi ﬁcant increase in bone mass
(+1.3%). No change in brain mass (+0.4%) was observed. Notably,
the relative loss of mass in high metabolic rate organs was signi ﬁcantly
higher than the loss of mass in low metabolic rate-organs, e.g. muscle
and bones. Accounting for changes in FFM composition as compared to
FFM as such explained 30% of the decline in resting EE. After adjust-
ment for the CR-induced changes in organ mass, metabolic adaptation
was ~55 kcal/d ( Bosy-Westphal et al., 2009 ). Of the FFM compartment,
the most signi ﬁcant predictors for the changes in resting EE were
changes in skeletal muscle mass and kidney mass explaining 34.9% and
4.5%, respectively .
Changes in organ mass may depend on the intervention modality
and metabolic health of subjects at baseline. In LookAhead, 82 patients
with overweight or obesity and type 2 diabetes achieved ~6 kg body
weight loss through dietary restriction and aerobic exercise . The lifestyle intervention group did not have a dis-
proportionate change in high metabolic rate organs (change in liver
−5.9%, spleen −4.3%, and kidney −1.5%) as compared to low me-
tabolic rate organs (skeletal muscle, −6.4%). Unfortunately, EE was
not reported in this study and thus, this hypothesis remains to be tested.
Importantly, the intervention modality, i.e. the inclusion of exercise to
induce CR, did not a ﬀect the degree of metabolic adaptation in the 6-
month CALERIE-study, but in this study, changes in organ masses were
not reported ( Table 1).
5.2. Metabolic mediators of CR
The CR-induced reduction in metabolic rate may be related to
changes in metabolic activity of the heart, i.e. heart rate and blood
pressure, and of the sympathetic nervous system .
These e ﬀects
may be mediated by CR-induced responses in circulating
hormones such as leptin, thyroid hormones and insulin.
5.2.1. Leptin
Leptin is an adipose tissue-derived hormone and its concentration is
proportional to fat mass. Evolutionarily, leptin is interpreted as anti-
obesity signal because it signals satiety and stimulates energy ex-
penditure . A marked reduction in leptin is
consistently reported with CR and likely occurs as a result of the de-
creased adipose tissue mass. This reduction in leptin occurs regardless
of the duration of the CR intervention; 6-month CALERIE 1, −44%
, 24-month CALERIE 2 ancillary, −6% , 3-week revisited Minnesota Starvation men, −44%
, 13-week revisited Minnesota Starvation women,
−42% ( Bosy-Westphal et al., 2009).
In CALERIE, the decline in circulating leptin was related to meta-
bolic adaptation measured during weight loss after six months
(r = 0.22) and 12 months ( r = 0.35) . This as-
sociation disappeared during weight loss maintenance . A similar ﬁnding was observed in patients with obesity. Fol-
lowing a very low calorie-diet for 8 weeks and achieving 11% weight
loss, the decline in leptin ( −48%) was weakly associated ( r = 0.24)
with metabolic adaptation (4%) . Interestingly,
weight loss-induced changes in leptin were not associated with meta-
bolic adaptation calculated considering changes in organ size ( Bosy-
Westphal et al., 2009 ; Muller et al., 2015).
Metabolically, a reduction in leptin may inﬂ uence metabolic adap-
tation through its interaction with skeletal muscle proteins. Skeletal
muscle chemomechanical work e ﬃ ciency is increased and the ratio of
glycolytic/oxidative enzyme activities decreased in subjects with a
decline in leptin following diet-induced weight loss . This role of leptin is further supported by the observation that
leptin repletion stimulates less energy-eﬃ cient myosin heavy chain IIx
isoform and thus reverses the weight-loss induced e ﬀects .
5.2.2. Thyroid hormones
Thyroid axis hormones, e.g. thyroid stimulating hormone, triio-
dothyronine (T3) and thyroxin (T4), a ﬀect EE and thereby are potential
mediators of CR-induced reductions in metabolic rate. Speci ﬁcally,
thyroid hormones regulate metabolic cycles, e.g. lipolysis/lipogenesis,
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
4

glucogenolysis/gluconeogenesis and protein synthesis/catabolism, ac-
celerate heat generation in the mitochondria, and accelerate heart rate
.
In the CALERIE trials, metabolic adaptation in 24-h EE after
3 months was positively associated with reductions in both T3 and T4
. This e ﬀect was transient during weight loss
since no associations between metabolic adaptation and thyroid hor-
mones were observed during active weight loss at 6 or 12 months . Thyroid hormones may be
important for EE regulation in the preservation of the metabolic
adaptation in weight loss maintenance. After 12 months of weight loss
maintenance in CALERIE (at month 24), reduced T4 concentrations
were associated with metabolic adaptation .
Furthermore, in a long-term observational study of 2 –4 years com-
paring energy metabolism during weight gain and weight loss, changes
in T3 explained 5.3% of the variance in changes in resting EE
. These longer trials imply that the thyroid axis
might have di ﬀerential roles in energy metabolism during weight loss
and weight loss maintenance.
Similar to leptin, thyroid hormones may also a ﬀect skeletal muscle
work e ﬃ ciency. In weight-reduced humans, T3 repletion reduced re-
lative expression of the more-e ﬃ cient/less-eﬃ cient myosin heavy chain
I/myosin heavy chain II isoforms and increased the ratio of the less-
eﬃ cient to the more-e ﬃ cient sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-
ATPase isoforms (SERCA1/SERCA2) . Similar
eﬀects have been observed after short-term T4 supplementation
.
The involvement of the thyroid axis in the regulation of metabolic
adaptation might also be sex speci ﬁc. In the short-term studies of severe
CR by Muller et al. (2015) and Bosy-Westphal et al. (2009) , T3 con-
centrations decreased by −39% in men after three weeks and −8% in
women after 13 weeks. Whereas in men the decrease in T3 con-
centrations was not associated with metabolic adaptation , despite smaller changes of T3 in women an association with
metabolic adaptation was observed ( Bosy-Westphal et al., 2009 ). To
summarize, there are indications that thyroid axis activity inﬂ uences
metabolic adaptation with CR but the variation in metabolic rate ex-
plained by thyroid hormones does not exceed 5% and may di ﬀer be-
tween men and women.
5.2.3. Insulin
Insulin is the central anabolic hormone in metabolic homeostasis. In
response to a meal, insulin increases and stimulates storage of glucose
and lipid which is accompanied by an increase in energy expenditure
(diet-induced thermogenesis). Weight loss induced metabolic adapta-
tion was strongly associated with insulin secretion ( r = 0.92) assessed
as 24-hour C-peptide excretion in overweight and
obese men and with decreased fasting insulin concentrations in women
(Bosy-Westphal et al., 2009 ). Similarly, insulin secretion, assessed as
30-min postprandial insulin concentrations and maximal insulin se-
cretion, as well as insulin resistance (HOMA, and during oral glucose
tolerance test) predicted changes in resting EE (independent of changes
in body composition) in a study of 21 overweight and obese men and
women during weight loss (10 –15%) maintenance .
In the CALERIE study, insulin concentrations and insulin resistance
declined with CR at all time points ( Heilbronn et al., 2006 ; Larson-
Meyer et al., 2006; Ravussin et al., 2015 ) but no association between
glucose homeostasis and metabolic adaptation was reported. Collec-
tively, these studies show that a metabolic adaptation is attributed in
part to the reduced energetic costs of insulin secretion, and likely
anabolic processes induced by insulin.
5.2.4. Neuroendocrine Hormones
A shift in neuroendocrine function from sympathetic to para-
sympathetic tone is one of the proposed mechanisms to explain the
attenuation in the rate of aging and longevity in rodents undergoing CR,
and thus possibly is related to the e ﬀect of low metabolic rate . Sympathetic nervous system activity as assessed through 24-
hour urinary epinephrine and norephinephrine excretion was not af-
fected by CR after 6 , 12 or 24 months . Moreover, there was no observed changes in growth
hormone, growth hormone secretion or insulin-like growth factor 1
. But notably the participants in the CALERIE
studies were normal weight or overweight but otherwise healthy to
begin with. Considered alone, these studies argue the notion that a
reduction in sympathetic tone mediated by catecholamines or the
growth-IGF1 axis contributes to CR-induced metabolic adaptation in
humans.
5.2.5. Sex steroids
CR has been shown to induce transient-3 weeks , 12 months, but not 24 months or 7 year-
reductions in testosterone concentrations . While
CR-induced reduction in testosterone may contribute to the decline in
FFM, no associations between metabolic adaptation and testosterone
concentrations have been observed after 3 weeks CR in men .
5.3. Mitochondrial energy eﬃ ciency
Energy intake requirements are the sum of energy expenditure for
ATP generation and for heat production ( Fig. 2). Thus, reducing resting
EE can be achieved through a reduction in metabolic processes con-
suming ATP, i.e. reducing ATP requirements, or through a reduction of
heat production. The ratio of ATP production to heat generation, or
alternatively, ATP production to oxygen consumption, can be de ﬁned
80 75 80 75
20
20 15
15
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Basal ATP
Reduced
Heat
Reduced
Both
Reduced
Energy Intake Requirements, AU
ATP Generation Heat Production
Fig. 2. Models for reduction of energy intake requirements.
In basal conditions, energy intake requirements are the sum of energy re-
quirements for ATP generation and for heat production (column 1). Through
CR, energy intake requirements for mass-adjusted metabolic rate, de ﬁned as
metabolic adaptation, are reduced (column 2 –4). Energy intake requirements
can be reduced through reduction of ATP production, that is an attenuation of
metabolic processes (column 2). Alternatively, or simultaneously (column 3 and
4) requirements can be reduced via reduced heat production which is achieved
through improving mitochondrial coupling.
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
5

as mitochondrial energy e ﬃ ciency. Increased mitochondrial energy
eﬃ ciency can be achieved by reducing uncoupling proteins or by al-
leviating protonmotive force on oxidative phosphorylation proteins
such as through less supply of protons or increased mitochondrial mass
.
Energy-rich substrates are oxidized in the mitochondria and provide
energy to transport electrons and protons across the inner mitochon-
drial membrane against their concentration gradients. Majority of
protons and electrons are transported back into the mitochondrial
lumen via coordinated relief of this gradient through ATPase, which
uses the energy to convert ADP to ATP. Alternatively, electrons or
protons can leak from the mitochondrial intermembrane space into the
mitochondrial lumen, avoid ATPase, and thereby produce heat instead
of ATP. Leakage of electrons and protons can occur passively caused by
an increased mitochondrial membrane gradient or can be facilitated
through uncoupling proteins. With CR where supply of energy-rich
substrates is reduced, proton motive force may be alleviated such that
proton leakage declines. Alternatively, inhibition of uncoupling pro-
teins can reduce proton leakage. Through either process, less energy
dissipates as heat and consequently less energy-rich substrates and
oxygen are required to convert the same amount of ADP to ATP.
In the 6-month CALERIE study, CR increased mitochondrial DNA
content by 35% and increased expression of genes encoding proteins
involved in mitochondrial function , supporting
the hypothesis that increased mitochondrial mass and function may
associate with metabolic adaptation. In the 24-month CALERIE study,
mitochondrial energetics were investigated in vivo using 31P-magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and optical spectroscopy .
Surprisingly, mitochondrial capacity, measured as maximal ATP
synthesis rate, and mitochondrial e ﬃ ciency which was de ﬁned as ATP
ﬂux relative to oxygen consumption (P:O-ratio), were una ﬀected by
12 months of CR. In line with the in vivo ﬁndings, targeted transcrip-
tional pro ﬁling of vastus lateralis muscle showed no e ﬀects on path-
ways involved in mitochondrial biogenesis or function. Interestingly, a
secondary analysis showed that individuals with higher P:O-ratio (mi-
tochondrial coupling) at baseline demonstrated a greater increase in
mitochondrial capacity and function, compared to those with lower
coupling at baseline . This implies that poorly
functioning mitochondria may preclude CR-induced improvements in
mitochondrial function, and possibly generation of free radicals and
hence oxidative stress. The CALERIE studies did not report any asso-
ciations between mitochondrial function (in vivo or in vitro) and me-
tabolic adaptation. However, uncoupling protein 2 in skeletal muscle
has been shown to associate with metabolic adaptation in 24-h EE after
6-week 50% CR . Importantly, mitochondrial
function has only been assessed in skeletal muscle, but energy e ﬃ ciency
may be more sensitive to changes in mitochondrial function in high
metabolic rate organs.
Improved mitochondrial e ﬃ ciency can be achieved through stimu-
lation of oxidative ATP production at the expense of glycolytic ATP
production. Such a change may contribute to substantially lower
(~15%) oxygen requirements . CR has been shown
to decrease glycolytic (phosphofructokinase, PFK) enzyme activity and
increase oxidative (cytochrome c oxidase, COX) enzyme activity
, but the impact on energy requirements re-
mains to be determined. In turn, an increased e ﬃ ciency in ATP pro-
duction would reduce skeletal muscle PI3K/AMPK signaling and reduce
the rate of substrate cycling between de novo lipogenesis and lipid
oxidation, leading to lower energy intake requirements .
Mitochondrial e ﬃ ciency
 is considered bene ﬁcial, because mi-
tochondrial oxygen consumption is proportional to production of re-
active oxygen species, i.e. oxidative damage ( ‘Oxidative Damage
Theory of Aging ’). CR-induced reductions in oxygen requirements are
therefore hypothesized to reduce oxidative stress and damage. The
CALERIE trials support this hypothesis by reporting that the observed
decline in metabolic rate was associated with reductions in measures of
oxidative stress. For example in the 6-month CALERIE study, CR re-
duced DNA damage ( Civitarese et al., 2007; Heilbronn et al., 2006),
plasma protein carbonyl concentrations and increased glutathione
peroxidase (re ﬂecting antioxidant defense) . In
the 24-month CALERIE study, reactive oxygen species (F2-isoprostane)
production was reduced ( Il'yasova et al., 2018 ; Redman et al., 2018).
Noteworthy, not all measures of oxidative stress improved, e.g. serum
protein carbonyl concentrations ( Heilbronn et al., 2006 ; Redman et al.,
2018), suggesting that CR exerts di ﬀering e ﬀects on tissue speci ﬁc
oxidative damage or that some measures of oxidative stress are not
sensitive enough.
6. Characteristics of metabolic adaptation
It was recently proposed by Muller et al. (2016) that there may be
diﬀerent phases of CR-induced metabolic adaptation ( Fig. 1). They
postulated that di ﬀerent regulatory systems are involved at three dis-
tinct phases: the initial phase which occurs during the ﬁrst week, the
weight loss phase which is between one week to one year, and the
weight maintenance phase.
During the ﬁrst phase of weight loss, metabolic adaptation is char-
acterized by the immediate response to a negative energy balance.
During this period, changes in FM are minimal, whereas declines FFM
are greater in comparison due to depletion of glycogen stores and as-
sociated losses of intracellular ﬂuid and sodium ( Heymsﬁeld et al.,
2011). Therefore, declines in FFM during the ﬁrst three weeks of CR are
most pronounced for the liver ( −40% of baseline) and a less in adipose
tissue (−15%). A decline in skeletal muscle mass is not observed before
~5 weeks after initiation.
Commensurate with an acute energy deﬁ cit, insulin, leptin, and
thyroid axis hormones fall, there is a decline in sympathetic nervous
system activity, and aldosterone. During this initial phase, insulin se-
cretion is decreased, gluconeogenesis enhanced, and glucose oxidation
is decreased at the expense of increased fat and protein oxidation.
Metabolic adaptation during this initial period is therefore likely re-
lated to an attenuation of insulin secretion due to reduced insulin re-
quirements and may relate to a substrate switch for ATP production.
During the second phase of weight loss termed ‘settling phase ’,
the
metabolic changes observed during the ﬁrst phase persist. The sus-
tained increase in fat oxidation now leads to a pronounced decrease in
FM. The longer the duration of CR, the larger the proportion of FM loss
as compared to FFM loss ( Heymsﬁeld et al., 2011 ). Changes in EE in the
settling phase are now proportional to weight change and there is no
further increase in metabolic adaptation with ongoing weight loss
. Metabolic adaptation during this period may be
supported by changes in FFM composition .
After reaching a new energy balance a weight loss plateau is rea-
lized. This maintenance phase is characterized by reductions in sym-
pathetic nervous system activity, thyroid hormones, and insulin.
Further reductions in FM cause low leptin concentrations and increased
free fatty acid concentrations. Together these physiological adaptations
maintain low EE, likely as an evolutionary defense mechanism to resist
against further weight loss ( Miller and Parsonage, 1975) and preserve
triglyceride stores in order to protect basic biological functions (e.g.,
reproduction) .
7. Physical activity
The interaction between CR, physical activity, EE, and aging is
complex. As discussed, CR reduces body weight and EE at rest, but CR
also reduced EE during activity . The reduction in
EE can be due to the smaller metabolic mass, lower energy require-
ments for ATP generation or to lower requirements for ATP for a given
activity through improved movement economy. According to the Rate
of Living theory, lower EE is proposed to be bene ﬁcial for an organism
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
6

to achieve longer life. Paradoxically, physical activity also promotes
longevity, yet acutely increases EE . The longevity
promoting e ﬀect of activity is therefore independent of the acute in-
crease in EE and due to unique metabolic adaptations induced by the
activity itself. Physical activity induces an acute energy de ﬁcit which
activates AMPK, uptake of substrates from plasma, lipolysis, mi-
tochondrial function, and fat oxidation. Chronically, these e ﬀects lead
to increased cardiorespiratory capacity, mitochondrial oxidative capa-
city, reduced lipid in plasma, tissues and cells, improved insulin sen-
sitivity and improved metabolic function of merely every organ in the
body. A crucial mediator of physical activity is oxidative stress. Per the
Oxidative Damage theory of aging, oxidative stress is detrimental but
transient increases in oxidative stress induced by physical activity are
vital for inducing adaptations such as increased mitochondrial function
and increasing anti-oxidative capacity ( ‘Metabolic hormesis ’)( Ristow
and Zarse, 2010 ).
In CALERIE, a reduction in total daily EE and absolute activity-re-
lated EE was observed after 6 ( Martin et al., 2011; Redman et al., 2009 ),
12 and 24 months ( Racette et al., 2017; Ravussin
et al., 2015). After adjustment for the change in body mass, or sleeping
metabolic rate, activity-related EE was still reduced after 6 months of
CR. This suggests a lower level of physical activity, or a non-intentional
“behavioral adaptation ” thought to conserve energy . Accelerometry and physical activity captured by 7-day recall did
not conﬁrm a reduction in activity-related EE suggesting that increased
muscle eﬃ ciency and/or decreased ﬁdgeting accounted for some of the
variability in activity-related EE . As CR continues,
declines in total daily EE and activity-related EE are no longer evident
. Thus, behavioral adaptations to decrease phy-
sical activity with CR appear to resolve over time. Importantly, the
behavioral adaptations to CR may vary between individuals. For ex-
ample, after 24 months CR, activity-related EE declined more in females
as compared with males .
A reduction in activity-related EE may also be a result of increased
movement economy. The energy cost of walking was found to be re-
duced by 22% after 6 kg weight loss and me-
chanical e ﬃ ciency of skeletal muscle at low workloads (pedaling a bi-
cycle to generate 10 or 25 W of power) was increased following 10%
weight loss . This data is further supported by
studies in rhesus monkeys, demonstrating that long-term CR decreased
metabolic cost of movement . Increased work
eﬃ ciency observed after weight loss may be mediated by leptin
 and thyroid hormones ( Johannsen et al., 2012;
Rosenbaum et al., 2018 ). Unfortunately, such measurements have not
been performed in participants of CALERIE.
8. Persistence of metabolic adaptation and weight regain
In
prospective observational cohorts, low metabolic rate adjusted
for body mass has been shown to predict long-term weight regain
. In addition, blunted diet induced thermogenesis
in response to low-protein overfeeding, i.e. thrifty phenotype, may at-
tenuate the e ﬀects of CR on weight loss and
may increase weight regain ( Hollstein et al., 2019 ; Reinhardt et al.,
2016). The poor physiological defenses against weight regain may in
part be explained by observations that metabolic adaptations are larger
after weight loss and do not fully recover when weight is regained.
Muller et al. (2016) observed a −108 kcal/d metabolic adaptation after
three weeks of 50% CR which was recovered by only 20 kcal/d with
two weeks of refeeding. Similarly, in an observational study of 83 pa-
tients (50% with obesity), resting EE adjusted for FFM and FM de-
creased by ~50 kcal/d during weight loss, but increased by 25 kcal/d
during subsequent weight regain .
Long-term studies of CR on metabolic rate have demonstrated that
metabolic adaptation persists long after the intervention. In a follow-up
of the CALERIE participants, 54% of the weight lost during the
intervention was regained after two years, while the control group re-
mained weight stable . Di ﬀerences in sleep EE
observed between the groups during the intervention persisted during
follow-up. These ﬁndings were extended by Rosenbaum et al. (2008) ,
who observed that metabolic adaptation persisted long after the initial
weight loss occurs (1 –9 years). Prospective observational studies in
patients with overweight or obesity support the hypothesis that meta-
bolic adaptations contribute to weight regain. Among 103 subjects with
overweight or obesity who completed a 13-week low-calorie diet in-
tervention, metabolic adaptation (de ﬁned as resting EE, adjusted for
changes in organ and tissue masses) was compared between those who
regained weight after 6 months ( ≥30% of loss, n = 27) to those who
maintained weight (within < ± 20% of weight change, n = 20) ( Bosy-
Westphal et al., 2013 ). As hypothesized, metabolic adaptation, i.e.
lower EE was evident in individuals who regained weight compared to
those who remained weight-stable ( Bosy-Westphal et al., 2013 ). To our
knowledge, weight regain has not yet been associated with metabolic
adaptation in a prospective, observational study, except for during
pregnancy ( Berggren et al., 2017 ; Most and Redman, 2019 ).
Importantly, resting EE only accounts for 60 –70% of total daily EE,
which ultimately determines energy balance and weight gain. Thus, the
contribution of metabolic adaptation to weight gain, may be masked by
behavioral variations in physical activity and eating behavior . Maintaining or increasing physical activity after weight
loss is likely the most promising option to bu ﬀer the persistent meta-
bolic adaptation and resist weight regain. While maintaining energy
balance, physical activity has been shown to improve protein balance
(i.e. less protein oxidation relative to intake) and fat balance (increased
fat oxidation relative to fat intake) . These ﬁndings
support the ‘collateral fattening hypothesis ’ , which
posits that low FFM drives overeating. In agreement with this hypoth-
esis, FFM (and not FM or BMI) has been shown to associate with self-
determined meal size and daily energy intake in humans .
In di ﬀerent studies, metabolic determinants of weight regain are
largely investigated for the e ﬀect on EE. However, it has been argued
that the observed e ﬀects on EE (< 100 kcal/d) are too small to explain
the e ﬀects in weight regain . In contrast, it is
proposed that induced changes in metabolic hormones may be more
relevant to hunger and satiety . For example,
decreased concentrations of leptin reduce satiety and thus may stimu-
late energy intake ( Rosenbaum and Leibel, 2012). Weight regain ap-
pears to be driven by processes involved in EE and energy intake, but
ultimately are de ﬁned by the ability for an individual to resist them.
Indeed, during CR long-term reduction in food cravings, and improve-
ments in dietary restraint and self-e ﬃ cacy are observed, supporting
success in weight loss maintenance . Learned be-
haviors such as dietary restraint and avoidance of ‘forbidden foods ’
were maintained after the intervention which may counteract the risk
for weight regain due to low metabolic rate .
Lastly, the reduction in FFM induced by CR may promote weight regain.
For example, low FFM relative to body size has been associated with
appetite (Hopkins and Blundell, 2017 ), weight gain and obesity , possibly due to a stimulation of food intake at meals
.
9. Future directions
Calorie restriction reduces metabolic rate, independent of changes
in fat-free mass, or mass of high metabolic rate organs. Metabolic ef-
fects of CR include the reduction in hormones related to energy ex-
penditure, but direct associations are inconclusive and may relate to the
duration of CR. CR-induced improvements in mitochondrial functions
are reported, but again, the e ﬀect on energy e ﬃ ciency may be small.
Poor mitochondrial function at baseline may prevent CR-induced im-
provements in mitochondrial capacity and energy e ﬃ ciency. Parallel
J. Most and L.M. Redman Experimental Gerontology 133 (2020) 110875
7

dietary supplements that stimulate mitochondrial capacity in patients
with poor mitochondrial function may overcome this limitation ( Most
et al., 2016; Timmers et al., 2011 ).
Reductions in energy expenditure (~5 –10%) induced by 15– 20%
CR are reported consistently. Per ‘Rate of Living ’-theory, this reduction
attenuates the primary aging process and is therefore bene ﬁcial. The
extent of this improvement is debatable. Previous studies have esti-
mated that CR may increase lifespan by 5 years, if implemented early in
adulthood, but only by 2 months, if implemented at age 60 ( Most and
Redman, 2017 ). These relatively small bene ﬁts in the elderly may be
outweighed by the potential adverse e ﬀects of CR, e.g. reductions in
metabolic rate and fat-free mass increase the risk for weight regain and
frailty. CR may therefore not be an appropriate intervention for older
individuals or those with relatively low fat-free mass.
The observed reductions in metabolic rate which are attributed to
hormone concentrations and physiological processes such as insulin
secretion, heart rate, and blood pressure may explain 50% of this re-
duction, hence do not exceed 3% of total daily EE. The increased risk
for weight regain, as demonstrated by di ﬀerent studies, may therefore
relate to an insu ﬃ cient adjustment of energy intake-regulating systems,
which require further study. Investigating such systems including sa-
tiety and hunger sensation may also lead to strategies to facilitate long-
term compliance to CR which is generally poor, and declines with the
degree of CR prescription and duration of the intervention .
Many factors in the interaction between CR, metabolic rate and
weight management are still unknown. For example, great controversy
exists about the optimal macronutrient composition. Some suggest low-
carbohydrate intake to increase EE , while other
suggest that low-fat is more bene ﬁcial . The positive
association between insulin secretion and metabolic adaptation ob-
served by Muller et al. (2015) would support the latter, while data from
Ebbeling and Ludwig suggest the contrary . In
addition, metabolic rate, or the e ﬀect of CR on metabolic rate, may be
modiﬁed by the genetic background , gastro-
intestinal morphology and the gut microbiota
(Canfora et al., 2015 ; Rosenbaum et al., 2015 ), although clinical studies
are not yet convincing ( Canfora et al., 2017 ; Reijnders et al., 2016 ; van
der Beek et al., 2018; Vrieze et al., 2014; Vrieze et al., 2012).
The interaction between energy intake and physical activity re-
quires further study. For example, under controlled conditions, exercise
training may prevent declines in total daily EE and FFM ,
both risk factors for weight regain. Moreover, increasing phy-
sical activity (in energy balance) also results in bene ﬁcial e ﬀects on
hunger and satiety regulation . In an ad libitum en-
vironment however, exercise training is an ine ﬀective means for weight
loss due to compensatory increases in energy intake .
Factors that have been demonstrated relevant to the e ﬀects of CR in
rodent studies are energy homeostatic systems and sex-speci ﬁcity. For
example, excitatory synapses on arcuate nucleus proopiomelanocortin
neurons have been shown to defend a higher level of body fat . Interestingly, POMC-neuron activation increased physical
activity and EE only in males, but not in females .
These ﬁndings may relate to observations in CALERIE, where activity-
related EE declined less in males after 24 months CR as compared with
females .
10. Conclusion
CR induces weight loss and a disproportionate reduction in energy
expenditure. This reduction is partly explained by changes in organ
sizes (~25–50%), while energy requirements for metabolic homeostasis
are also reduced. The inter-individual variability in these changes re-
quires further investigation as does the e ﬀects of CR on energy intake-
regulating mechanisms, speci ﬁcally in free-living environments.
Author statement
Jasper Most: Conception of idea, prepared original draft. Leanne
Redman: Conception of idea, critical reviewing, editing and approval of
ﬁnal draft.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
The funding source was not involved in writing of this manuscript.
Acknowledgements
None.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
[P30DK072476 and U54GM104940].