MINI REVIEW
published: 04 July 2022
doi: 
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 1 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021
Edited by:
Chris J. Bishop,
Middlesex University, United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Philip Chilibeck,
University of Saskatchewan, Canada
*Correspondence:
Javier Raya-González
rayagonzalezjavier@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Elite Sports and Performance
Enhancement,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living
Received: 20 May 2022
Accepted: 14 June 2022
Published: 04 July 2022
Citation:
Bernárdez-Vázquez R,
Raya-González J, Castillo D and
Beato M (2022) Resistance Training
Variables for Optimization of Muscle
Hypertrophy: An Umbrella Review.
Front. Sports Act. Living 4:949021.
doi: 
Resistance Training Variables for
Optimization of Muscle Hypertrophy:
An Umbrella Review
Roberto Bernárdez-Vázquez 1, Javier Raya-González 1*, Daniel Castillo 2 and
Marco Beato 3,4
1 Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Isabel I, Burgos, Spa in, 2 Valoración del Rendimiento Deportivo, Actividad Física y
Salud, y Lesiones Deportivas (REDAFLED), Universidad de Va lladolid, Soria, Spain, 3 School of Health and Sports Science,
University of Suffolk, Ipswich, United Kingdom, 4 Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Suffolk, Ips wich,
United Kingdom
This umbrella review aimed to analyze the different variabl es of resistance training and
their effect on hypertrophy, and to provide practical recommendations for the prescription
of resistance training programs to maximize hypertrophy re sponses. A systematic
research was conducted through of PubMed/MEDLINE, SPORTDi scus and Web of
Science following the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses
statement guidelines. A total of 52 meta-analyses were foun d, of which 14 met the
inclusion criteria. These studies were published between 2 009 and 2020 and comprised
178 primary studies corresponding to 4,784 participants. F ollowing a methodological
quality analysis, nine meta-analyses were categorized as h igh quality, presenting values
of 81–88%. The remaining meta-analyses were rated as modera te quality, with values
between 63–75%. Based on this umbrella review, we can state t hat at least 10 sets per
week per muscle group is optimal, that eccentric contractio ns seem important, very slow
repetitions (≥10 s) should be avoided, and that blood ﬂow restriction might be beneﬁcial
for some individuals. In addition, other variables as, exer cise order, time of the day and
type of periodization appear not to directly inﬂuence the ma gnitude of muscle mass
gains. These ﬁndings provide valuable information for the d esign and conﬁguration of
the resistance training program with the aim of optimizing m uscle hypertrophy.
Keywords: muscle mass, cross sectional area, load magnitude, t raining methods, resistance
INTRODUCTION
Hypertrophy is deﬁned as an increase in muscular size, which ca n be achieved through exercise.
Two main factors contribute to this physiological phenomenon such as sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
(i.e., increased muscle glycogen storage) and myoﬁbrillar hypertrophy (i.e., increased myoﬁbril size
and myoﬁbrillar number) (
Triplett and Haﬀ, 2015). In this regard, resistance training is considered
the gold standard for increasing muscle mass, which is based on three key variables such as
mechanical stress, metabolic stress, and muscle damage . Traditionally,
resistance training focused on hypertrophy is characterized by moderate load, high total volume
load and short rest periods ( Kraemer and Ratamess, 2005 ), although the eﬀects of resistance
programs vary depending on the manipulation of its variables ( Schoenfeld and Grgic, 2017 ). Since
promising eﬀects related to the increase of muscular size on bo th performance and health have
been previously reported , it seems justiﬁed to search for the most eﬀective
methods to generate hypertrophy.

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
Due to the strong positive relationship observed between
the muscle’s capacity to generate force and their cross-sect ional
area (CSA) , hypertrophy is one of
the main goals pursued by both professional and recreational
athletes. Thus, several research studies have analyzed the e ﬀects
of resistance training on hypertrophy and its subsequent forc e
level . However, it is important to highlight
that most team sports require high-force level, but also that the
athletes must apply it in the minimum time period . Regarding this, increasing muscle mass include a positive
inﬂuence on rate of force development and power, which improve
sportive actions such sprinting, jumping, and change of direction
ability (
Keiner et al., 2014; Seitz et al., 2014; Suchomel et al., 2018).
In addition, muscle mass is a key factor in sports disciplines
where the quality and quantity of muscle development is judge d,
such as bodybuilding . Therefore, promoting
hypertrophy could be a relevant strategy for improving sports
performance .
From a human health standpoint, muscle mass plays a
signiﬁcant role in several actions of daily life as locomoti on
(McLeod et al., 2016 ), so low levels of muscle mass may
lead to an increased risk of several diseases . In this regard, resistance training and their associated
hypertrophy adaptations have been shown to have health
beneﬁts such as reducing body fat, increasing metabolic rat e,
lowering blood pressure and cardiovascular demands on exercise,
improving blood lipid proﬁle, glucose tolerance and insulin
sensitivity, a reduction in the risk of suﬀering from type II
diabetes, an improvement in mobility and functional capacity ,
an increase in strength, muscle and bone mass, and an increas e
in related factors with quality of life (
Wolfe, 2006; Maestroni
et al., 2020 ). Speciﬁcally, Balachandran et al. (2014) applied
a hypertrophy-oriented resistance program (3 sets of 10–12
repetitions using 70% of their one-repetition maximum and 1–
2 min recovery) with sarcopenic obese adults during 15 weeks
obtaining improvements in functional capability and power, as
well as a reduction in fat mass. On the other hand,
Kadoglou
et al. (2012) observed signiﬁcant improvements in glycemic
control, insulin sensitivity and triglycerides after the a pplication
of a hypertrophy training program (2–3 sets of 8–10 repetitions
using 60–80% of the one-repetition maximum and 1–2 min
recovery) in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. For all
these aforementioned beneﬁts, a comprehensive and controll ed
increase in muscle mass seems to be recommended for anyone,
regardless of their age or ﬁtness level.
Muscle hypertrophy adaptations can be obtained through
several resistance training programs (
Lixandrão et al., 2015;
Radaelli et al., 2015; Fink et al., 2016 ). However, there is no
well-established consensus on how resistance training var iables
should be manipulated to optimize muscle growth, so an
umbrella review on this topic is necessary. An umbrella revie w
is characterized by a unique criterion for the selection of
scientiﬁc evidence, which only considers for inclusion the higher
standard of evidence such as systematic reviews and meta-
analyses . This approach oﬀers the
opportunity to compare and discuss ﬁndings of diﬀerent review
papers—that can be summarized in a single review. Thus,
the aims of this review were, ﬁrstly, to analyze the current
and high-quality scientiﬁc literature (i.e., meta-analysi s) on the
manipulation of diﬀerent variables of resistance training and
their eﬀect on hypertrophy responses, and, secondly, to provide
practical recommendations for the prescription of resistance
training programs to maximize hypertrophy responses.
METHODS
Umbrella Review Design
The present umbrella review was carried out following the
guidelines set forth by the working group of
Aromataris et al.
(2015) and followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) statement guidelines .
Search Strategy
For this research, the following database were included:
PubMed/MEDLINE, SPORTDiscus and Web of Science.
Likewise, ResearchGate was used as a source of complementary
information. The search syntax included the following
keywords coupled with Boolean operators: “meta-analysis”
AND (“resistance training” OR “resistance exercise” OR
“strength training” OR “strength exercise” OR “strengtheni ng
exercise” OR “weight lifting” OR “weight training” OR “bloo d
ﬂow restriction” OR “blood-ﬂow restricted” OR “blood ﬂow
restricted” OR “blood restriction” OR BFR OR hypoxia OR
“muscle actions”) AND ((hypertrophy OR muscles OR CSA OR
“cross sectional area” OR “cross-sectional area” OR growth OR
“muscle size” OR “muscle thickness” OR “lean body mass” OR
LBM OR “fat free mass” OR “fat-free mass” OR “skeletal muscle”
OR “muscle ﬁbers” OR bodybuilding OR “body building” OR
“muscle gain” OR “muscular volume” OR “body composition”
OR “muscular adaptations” OR “hypertrophic eﬀects”) AND
(volume OR frequency OR frequencies OR sets OR multiple
OR single OR tempo OR velocity OR speed OR duration OR
repetitions OR order OR “split training” OR “total body training”
OR “split routine” OR “split weight training” OR ((training OR
light OR low OR “low-” OR “high-”) AND load) OR “low-load”
OR “high-load” OR intensity OR eccentric OR concentric
OR shortening OR lengthening OR “contraction mode” OR
“time-of-day” OR “time of day” OR “diurnal ﬂuctuations” OR
“circadian variation” OR “circadian rhythms” OR program OR
programs). A secondary search was performed based on the
screening of the reference lists of the selected meta-analy ses.
The last and deﬁnitive search was conducted on 27th November
2021. Two authors (RBV and JR) independently screened the
title and abstract of each reference to locate potentially rele vant
studies and reviewed them in detail to identify articles tha t met
the inclusion criteria. Any discrepancies between the autho rs in
the selection process were solved in consultation with a third
reviewer (DC).
Inclusion Criteria
Meta-analyses published in English whose aim was to analyze the
eﬀect of manipulating diﬀerent variables of resistance trainin g in
muscle hypertrophy adaptations were included in this umbrella
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 2 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
review. Following to the Participant-Intervention-Compari son-
Outcome (PICO) process for evidence-based practice , the subsequent inclusion criteria were applied:
a) Participants: Male and/or female healthy and physically active
practitioners. Studies focused on speciﬁc age-populations as
children or elderly participants were excluded.
b) Interventions: Resistance training programs with traditional
materials (i.e., free weights and weight stack machines).
c) Comparison group: Usual training (no additional training).
d) Outcome measures: Muscle mass, CSA, lean body mass,
muscle girth, muscle thickness, fat-free mass, muscle ﬁbers and
muscle volume.
Methodological Quality Analysis
The methodological quality of the included meta-analyses wa s
assessed through the Assessing the Methodological Quality o f
Systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR 2) checklist, which is considered
as a reliable and valid tool to evaluate the risk of bias . AMSTAR 2 is composed by 16 diﬀerent items,
which were answered with a “yes”, “no”, “cannot answer” or “n ot
applicable” and only positive answers (i.e., “yes”) allow to su m
1 point. Meta-analyses were classiﬁed as high quality (at least
80% of the items were satisﬁed), moderate quality (between 40
and 80% of the items were satisﬁed) or low quality ( <40% of
the items were satisﬁed) attending to the obtained score in t he
AMSTAR 2 checklist.
Quality of the Evidence Evaluation
The quality of the evidence was evaluated using the modiﬁed
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) principles .
In this sense, systematic reviews were classiﬁed as high
(i.e., at least two high-quality primary studies), moderate
(i.e., at least one high quality primary study or at least
two moderate-quality primary studies), low (i.e., only
moderate-quality primary studies and/or inconsistent resu lts
in the primary studies) or very low (i.e., no medium to
high quality systematic review identiﬁed on this topic). If
the quality of the primary studies was not assessed, the
systematic review must be classiﬁed as “no evidence from
systematic review”.
Study Coding and Data Extraction
The following moderator variables were extracted from the
included reviews: (a) authors and year of publication, (b)
resistance training variable analyzed, (c) main aim of the
meta-analysis, (d) number of studies/participants included
in the meta-analysis, (e) mean interventions duration, (f)
heterogeneity among primary studies (I 2), and (g) main
ﬁndings or conclusions reported by the authors. Data
extraction, methodological quality assessment and quality
of the evidence evaluation were performed independently
by two authors (RBV and JRG) and discrepancies between
the authors were resolved in consultation with a third
reviewer (DC).
RESUL TS
Search Results
Figure 1 shows the ﬂow diagram of the meta-analyses’ retrieval
process followed in this umbrella review. The initial search
identiﬁed 55 meta-analyses, while 2 additional meta-analyses
were found through the secondary search. Subsequently, 25
duplicate records were removed, and 13 meta-analyses were
excluded based on their titles and/or abstracts. Nineteen me ta-
analyses were read in more detail (i.e., full-text) and 14 met a-
analyses were included in the umbrella review (
Roig et al., 2009;
Krieger, 2010; Schoenfeld et al., 2015, 2016a, 2017a,b,c, 2 019a;
Slysz et al., 2016; Grgic et al., 2017, 2019; Lixandrão et al. , 2018;
Grgic, 2020; Nunes et al., 2020 ).
Descriptive Characteristics of the Umbrella
Review
The included meta-analyses are summarized in Table 1. These
studies were published between 2009 and 2020 and comprised
178 primary studies corresponding to 4,704 participants. The
14 selected meta-analyses were classiﬁed attending to the
analyzed variable, diﬀerentiating between volume (
Krieger,
2010; Schoenfeld et al., 2017a ), frequency ( Schoenfeld et al.,
2019a), intensity ( Schoenfeld et al., 2016a, 2017c; Grgic, 2020 ),
contraction type ( Roig et al., 2009; Schoenfeld et al., 2017b ),
repetition duration , exercises order
, time of day , periodization
followed and blood-ﬂow restriction ( Slysz
et al., 2016; Lixandrão et al., 2018 ).
Methodological Quality Assessment and
Quality of the Evidence Evaluation
The methodological quality of the 14 included meta-analyses i s
presented in Table 2. Nine meta-analyses were categorized as
high quality, presenting values of 81 and 88% (i.e., 13 items
satisﬁed) (
Schoenfeld et al., 2015, 2017a,b, 2019a; Grgic et al.,
2017, 2019; Lixandrão et al., 2018; Nunes et al., 2020 ). The
remaining meta-analyses were rated as moderate quality, with
values between 63 and 75% (i.e., from 10 to 12 items satisﬁed)
(
Roig et al., 2009; Krieger, 2010; Schoenfeld et al., 2016a, 20 17c;
Slysz et al., 2016; Grgic, 2020 ). According to GRADE, 8 meta-
analyses were based on high-quality primary studies (i.e., hi gh
GRADE) ( Roig et al., 2009; Slysz et al., 2016; Grgic et al., 2017,
2019; Schoenfeld et al., 2017c; Lixandrão et al., 2018; Grgi c,
2020; Nunes et al., 2020 ) while the other 7 meta-analyses did
not presented information regarding to quality ( Krieger, 2010;
Schoenfeld et al., 2015, 2016a, 2017a,b, 2019a ).
DISCUSSION
The main aims of this review were, ﬁrstly, to analyze the
diﬀerent variables of resistance training and their eﬀect on
hypertrophy responses, and secondly, to provide practical
recommendations for the prescription of resistance training
programs to maximize hypertrophy responses. Based on the
14 meta-analyses and the 178 primary studies included in our
umbrella review, we can conclude that the variables of volum e,
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 3 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
FIGURE 1 | Flow diagram of the study retrieval process.
frequency, intensity, contraction type, repetition duratio n, and
the application of the restriction of blood ﬂow can generate
hypertrophy adaptations in healthy subjects. Conversely, oth er
variables such as exercise order, time of the day and type of
periodization appear not to directly inﬂuence the magnitude
of muscle mass gains, however further research is necessary to
clarify their capability to stimulate hypertrophy. The ﬁnding s
reported in this umbrella review provide valuable informatio n
for the design and conﬁguration of resistance training progr ams
aiming at optimizing muscle hypertrophy.
Sets
Volume is commonly deﬁned as the total amount of work
performed (
Schoenfeld and Grgic, 2017) and can be expressed as
the total number of sets/repetition per exercise ( Wernbom et al.,
2007; Schoenfeld et al., 2017a ) or the total number of repetitions
multiplied by the amount of weight used in an exercise across
sets (
Schoenfeld et al., 2016b ). This variable has received a great
deal of attention with respect to enhancing muscle hypertrophy
(
Schoenfeld and Grgic, 2017 ), since it has been traditionally
assumed that prescribing high-volume during resistance training
programs will produce greater gains in muscle mass ( McCall
et al., 1999 ). This statement is supported by the fact that, when
the rest of the variables remain constant, increases in volum e will
necessarily increase the overall time-under-tension, whi ch has
been proposed as an important driver of anabolism . However, it is still not clear if there is a real dose-respons e
relationship for this variable and if there is a cut-oﬀ point f rom
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 4 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
TABLE 1 | Summary of meta-analyses that investigated the effects of m odify resistance training variables on hypertrophy.
References Variable Aim Studies
(participants)
Interventions’
duration
Heterogeneity
(I2)
Findings/conclusions
Krieger (2010) Volume T o compare the effects of single
and multiple sets per exercise on
muscle hypertrophy.
8 (322) From 6 to
24 weeks
NR Multiple sets (2–3 sets) are associated with 40%
greater hypertrophy-related than 1 set, in both
trained and untrained subjects. the trend was
observed that 4–6 sets could give an even
greater response, but the small number of
included studies prevents from establishing any
deﬁnitive conclusions.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2017a)
Volume T o elucidate the effects of total
weekly volume on changes in
measures of muscle mass.
15 (390) From 6
weeks to 6
months
NR Although low volumes ( ≤4 weekly sets/muscle
group) are enough to get substantial gains in
muscle hypertrophy, the ﬁndings indicate a
graded dose-response relationship whereby
increases in volume produce greater gains in
muscle hypertrophy.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2019a)
Frequency T o investigate the effects of
weekly training frequency on
hypertrophic adaptations.
25 (836) From 6 to
30 weeks
0% Resistance training frequency does not
signiﬁcantly or meaningfully impact muscle
hypertrophy when volume is equated.
Conversely, a signiﬁcant effect favoring higher
frequencies were observed when volume was
not equated.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2016a)
Intensity T o compare the effects of low-
vs. high-load training in
enhancing post-exercise
muscular hypertrophy.
8 (191) From 6 to
13 weeks
NR Training with loads ≤ 60% 1RM can promote
substantial increases in muscle hypertrophy in
untrained individuals, and although a strong trend
was noted for superiority of heavy loading
regarding to muscle hypertrophy, no signiﬁcant
differences were observed.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2017b)
Intensity T o compare changes in strength
and hypertrophy between low-
vs. high-load resistance training
protocols.
10 (630) From 6
weeks to 1
year
NR The ﬁndings indicate that changes in measures of
muscle hypertrophy were similar when trained
with low-loads compared to high-loads.
Grgic (2020) Intensity to explore the effects of low-load
vs. high-load resistance training
on type I and type II muscle ﬁber
hypertrophy.
10 (120) From 6 to
12 weeks
0-18% This meta-analysis did not provide signiﬁcant
differences in hypertrophy when compared the
effects of low-loads vs. high-loads (performed to
momentary muscular failure) in both type I and
type II muscle ﬁbers.
Roig et al.
(2009)
Contraction
type
T o determine if eccentric
exercise is superior to concentric
exercise in stimulating gains in
muscle mass.
20 (678) From 4 to
25 weeks
65% Eccentric training appears to be more effective at
increasing muscle mass than concentric training,
maybe due to the higher forces developed during
this type of exercise. Additionally, adaptations
after eccentric training are highly speciﬁc to the
velocity.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2017c)
Contraction
type
T o compare the hypertrophic
effects of concentric vs.
eccentric training in healthy
adults following regimented
resistance training.
15 (356) From 6
weeks to 5
months
NR Although both concentric and eccentric modes
promote signiﬁcant muscular hypertrophy, a
small advantage favoring eccentric training was
observed for promoting a hypertrophic response.
Schoenfeld
et al. (2015)
Repetition
duration
T o determine whether alterations
in repetition duration can amplify
the hypertrophic response to
resistance training.
8 (239) From 6 to
14 weeks
NR Similar gains in hypertrophy were observed when
training with repetition durations ranging from 0.5
to 8 s to concentric muscular failure. In addition,
training at volitionally very slow durations (10 s
per repetition) is inferior from a hypertrophy
standpoint.
Nunes et al.
(2020)
Exercises
order
T o analyze the effects of exercise
order on muscular hypertrophy.
11 (268) From 6 to
12 weeks
0% The ﬁndings obtained indicated that gains in
muscle hypertrophy are not inﬂuenced by the
exercise order (multi-single vs. single vs. multi)
within resistance training programs.
Grgic et al.
(2019)
Time of
day
T o elucidate the effects of
morning vs. evening resistance
training on muscle hypertrophy.
6 (221) From 6 to
24weeks
0% The ﬁndings showed that increases in muscle
size are similar irrespective of the time of day at
which the training is performed.
(Continued)
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 5 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
TABLE 1 | Continued
References Variable Aim Studies
(participants)
Interventions’
duration
Heterogeneity
(I2)
Findings/conclusions
Grgic et al.
(2017)
Periodization T o compare the effects of linear
periodization and daily
undulating periodization
resistance training programs on
muscle hypertrophy.
13 (303) From 6 to
26 weeks
NR The ﬁndings obtained indicated that the effects of
the two periodization models (lineal and
undulating) on muscle hypertrophy are likely to
be similar.
Slysz et al.
(2016)
BFR T o assess the effectiveness of
BFR exercise on muscle
hypertrophy compared to
traditional resistance training.
19 (377) NR NR The ﬁndings showed that suggests that the
addition of BFR to dynamic exercise training is
effective for augmenting changes in muscle size.
Lixandrão
et al. (2018)
BFR T o compare the effects of
high-load vs. low-load resistance
training associated with BFR on
muscle gains.
10 (222) From 4 to
12 weeks
NR The results obtained demonstrate similar muscle
gains for high-load as compared with low-load
resistance training associated with BFR.
NR, non-reported; 1RM, one repetition maximum; BFR, blow ﬂood restriction.
which, even if the volume increases, the muscle hypertrophy does
not increase. In this regard,
Krieger (2010) performed a meta-
analysis in order to compare the eﬀects on hypertrophy response
between the use of one and multiple sets per exercise and to
establish a dose-response relationship between training vo lume
and hypertrophy adaptations. This author found that performing
multiple sets (2–3 sets) entails 40% more hypertrophy compared
to a single set . Regarding the analysis of the dose-
response relationship, the results of this meta-analysis reported signiﬁcant diﬀerences in muscle mass gains when
2-3 sets compared to 1 set were performed, while no diﬀerences
were observed when comparing volumes of 2–3 sets vs. 4–
6 sets. This could be due to the theoretically increasing of
protein synthesis with increased volume up 
to a point , from which this production
remains stable—limiting greater gains in muscle mass. According
to the previous study, Schoenfeld et al. (2017a) observed a
graded dose-response relationship between resistance trai ning
weekly volume and muscle growth. Speciﬁcally, these authors
established that low-volume protocols (≤4 weekly sets per muscle
group) could be enough to get substantial gains in muscle
hypertrophy, which is valuable information to those for which
the conservation of energy is an ongoing concern or those
with a reduced time availability. However, they also observ ed
that at least 10 weekly sets per muscle group is necessary to
maximize increases in muscle mass (
Schoenfeld et al., 2017a ).
Some authors hypothesized that the repeated application of high-
volume stimulus during resistance training sessions maxim izes
the anabolic responses (higher protein synthesis) due to the
greater metabolic stress generated . Finally,
these authors also refer to the existence of a hypertrophic
adaptations plateau, advising that training above this level
could generate overtraining. Although resistance training volume
seems to present a positive dose-response relationship, furthe r
research is needed to clarify the level over which there is a plateau,
which is currently not well understood. These meta-analyses
included in this umbrella review showed some limitations—
authors highlight the scarce number of studies that include d 4–6
sets per exercises as training variable, as well as the use of indirect
measurement methods (e.g., BodPod) to assess the muscle gain s
in some of the includes studies.
Frequency
Closely related to volume, frequency appears to be a key variabl e
for hypertrophy gain, which refers to the number of resistance
training sessions performed or the number of times a speciﬁc
muscle group is trained in a given period of time, usually
a week (
Schoenfeld et al., 2016c ). To determine the eﬀects
of resistance training frequency on hypertrophic outcomes,
Schoenfeld et al. (2019a) observed that when volume is equated,
frequency does not signiﬁcantly impact muscle hypertrophy.
Instead, the authors reported that a signiﬁcant eﬀect favorin g
higher frequencies was observed when volume was not equated .
This could be due to the fact that by maintaining the volume,
increasing the weekly frequency allows maintaining the int ensity
of the eﬀort optimizing recovery between sessions. However,
it has been observed that using high training frequencies
combined with high intensities can lead to a rapid decline in
performance and an increased risk of overtraining . Therefore, periodizing frequency and/or including periods
of low frequency on a regular basis (i.e., tapering periods)
can help to maximize hypertrophy responses and to reduce
the potential for overtraining, but more research is needed t o
verify this hypothesis . Despite these results,
training frequency can be a useful strategy to increase the ov erall
training volume, a variable that has shown a dose-response
relationship with hypertrophy (
Schoenfeld et al., 2017a ). In
addition, variations in inter-individual responses to trai ning
frequency has been observed, so individualization of the tr aining
program is essential to maximize the hypertrophy potential of
each participant (
Haﬀ and Nimphius, 2012).
The main limitations observed in the review in our hands,
which examined the eﬀect of training frequency on hypertrophy,
were that the direct measurements were only carried out on
the thighs and arms, so the results cannot be extrapolated to
other muscle groups; it was not possible to compare the eﬀect of
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 6 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
TABLE 2 | Overall results of the AMSTAR 2 checklist.
References 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Score GRADE
Krieger (2010) Yes No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 69% moder ate NEFSR
Schoenfeld et al. (2017a) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h NEFSR
Schoenfeld et al. (2019a) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h NEFSR
Schoenfeld et al. (2016a) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 75% mode rate NEFSR
Schoenfeld et al. (2017b) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 75% mode rate High
Grgic (2020) Yes No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 63% modera te High
Roig et al. (2009) Yes No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 69% moder ate High
Schoenfeld et al. (2017c) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h NEFSR
Schoenfeld et al. (2015) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h NEFSR
Nunes et al. (2020) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h High
Grgic et al. (2019) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h High
Grgic et al. (2017) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h High
Slysz et al. (2016) Yes No Yes Yes Yes No No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 69% moder ate High
Lixandrão et al. (2018) Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 81% hig h High
AMSTAR 2, Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews 2; NEFSR, No evidence from systematic review.
training frequency between multi-joint and single-joint e xercises
as well as the eﬀect of participants’ age on chronical adaptation s.
Intensity
This variable is considered one of those with the greatest
eﬀect on hypertrophy responses . In this regard,
each percentage of the 1RM is related to a certain number
of maximum repetitions to be performed ,
traditionally categorized into low ( <30% 1RM, >20 reps),
moderate (30–70% 1RM, 11–20 reps) and high ( >70% 1RM, <
11 reps) ranges ( Soriano et al., 2015, 2017 ). Consequently, each
percentage of 1RM is associated with a diﬀerent energy system
and fatigue level (
Sánchez-Medina and González-Badillo, 2011 ),
impacting the extent of the hypertrophic response . Traditionally, training using high loads with a moderate
number of repetitions (i.e., 80% 1RM, 8–10 reps) has been
considered as a key strategy to optimize the muscle gains
, based on the existence of an intensity
threshold from which the increase in metabolic stress improve s
the hypertrophy response, allowing the recruitment of high-
threshold motor units, which is not possible with the high
repetition range . However, there is a lack of
evidence to objectively establish the balance between exter nal
load, metabolic stress and hypertrophy responses. Schoenfeld
et al. (2016a) performed a meta-analysis aiming to compare
the eﬀects of low- vs. high-load training in enhancing post-
exercise muscular hypertrophy, who observed that resistance
training programs using loads < 60% 1RM allows to achieve
hypertrophy levels similar to those achieved with high loads
(≥65% 1 RM) in untrained individuals, although they observed
a trend toward greater hypertrophy using high loads (diﬀerence
= 0.43 ± 0.24; CI: −0.05, 0.92; p = 0.076), (
Schoenfeld et al.,
2016a) which supports the established guidelines for hypertrophy
training (loads > 65% 1RM) ( Kraemer and Ratamess, 2004 ).
These similar hypertrophy responses reported in this review
could be due to several factors such as the training level of t he
participants involved in the studies, the length of the traini ng
process, the type of exercise utilized, rest interval, and tra ining
frequency. In a second meta-analysis,
Schoenfeld et al. (2017c)
observed similar hypertrophy changes after the use of high or
low loads when muscle failure was reached. Conversely to the
ﬁrst reported meta-analysis, this study did not observe a super ior
trend toward the use of high loads. These authors suggest tha t
training with low loads implies a higher level of discomfort,
although this did not imply a lower adherence to it compared to
that reported in programs with high loads. Finally,
Grgic (2020)
conducted a new meta-analysis on this topic and observed non-
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in hypertrophy when comparing the eﬀects
of low-loads vs. high-loads (performed to momentary muscular
failure) in both type I and type II muscle ﬁbers. Additionally, th is
author reported a 95% conﬁdence and prediction intervals very
wide, so there is a clear need for future research on this topic .
These results suggest that the selection of the load to use wit hin a
strength training program whose objective is to increase musc le
mass should be made based on individual criteria (e.g., trai ning
status of the participants, length of the training process).
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 7 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
A limitation of these meta-analyses ( Schoenfeld et al., 2016a,
2017c) is the level of the participants (untrained individuals
with minimal research on trained individuals) which diﬃcult
to extrapolate the results to trained athletes. In addition, few
participants were involved in the included studies and the len gth
of the protocols in some studies was a bit reduced.
Contraction Type
Traditionally, it has been assumed that eccentric contract ions
promote greater gains in muscle mass compared to concentric
contractions (
Hortobágyi et al., 2000 ), based on the idea that the
mechanical stress placed on the eccentrically contracted mu scles
triggers a progressive activation of genes responsible for ce llular
growth and development, which is not possible by concentric
or isometric actions (
Chen et al., 2002; Barash et al., 2004 ).
Additionally, some authors have suggested that eccentric a ctions
promote a more rapid protein synthetic response and greater
increases in anabolic signaling , generated
by the result of the increase muscle damage .
To get a more comprehensive knowledge about the superiority
of eccentric contractions compared to concentric contracti ons in
muscle gains,
Roig et al. (2009) observed that eccentric exercise
is more eﬀective than concentric exercise in increasing musc le
girth mainly due to the higher absolute loads imposed during
eccentric contractions. However, these authors also indic ated
that concentric training performed separately can promote
increases in muscle mass.
Schoenfeld et al. (2017b) performed
a meta-analysis and conﬁrmed the advantage of eccentric
contractions for increasing hypertrophy, although this advantage
was relatively small (eccentric training 10% vs. concentri c 6.8%).
These diﬀerences could be explained because of the higher forc e
and mechanic load generated during eccentric training compared
to concentric when the same repetitions number is performed
(
Schoenfeld et al., 2017b ). However, when mechanical work was
equaled, the results obtained were inconclusive ( Hawkins et al.,
1999; Moore et al., 2012 ). Additionally, Schoenfeld et al. (2017b)
also observed that concentric contractions induced hypertr ophy
gains in the middle portion of the muscle, while eccentric
contractions have a greater eﬀect on the distal portions, possi bly
due to localized muscle damage along the ﬁber produced by non-
uniform muscle activation of eccentric contractions. Due t o the
diﬀerent responses of both contractions, it seems appropriate to
combine both types to optimize the hypertrophy response (e.g.,
using technologies that allow this) (
Beato and dello Iacono, 2020).
Finally, these authors found that eccentric training produc ed
greater hypertrophy of type II ﬁbers than concentric, which could
be explained because eccentric contractions preferentially r ecruit
high-threshold motor units, which contain more type II ﬁbers
(
Beato and dello Iacono, 2020 ). However, the mechanism by
which such a ﬁber type preference exists is not clear.
The comparison between adaptations on hypertrophy caused
by concentric and eccentric contractions have been limited by
the diﬃculty of isolating them from human movement, which
implies a cyclical repetition of both types of contraction; the
uncertainty to know the intensity implied by an external load
during an eccentric contraction; and the speciﬁcity of resis tance
training regarding speed and mode of contraction . Therefore, it seems necessary to delve into the possible
relationship between the eﬀects on hypertrophy and the type of
contraction, diﬀerentiating between body hemispheres, diﬀere nt
muscle regions, the role of induced muscle damage in the
increase in hypertrophy, the inﬂuence of the angle of pennation
and the length of the fascicle and the comparison between
types of contractions equating mechanic load (
Roig et al., 2009;
Schoenfeld et al., 2017b).
Repetition Duration
Training with loads lower than 80–85% 1RM allows the trainee
to voluntarily modify the tempo of the lift , an action that reduces the velocity of the lift by increasi ng
the mechanical tension manifested by the muscle , thus promoting a greater hypertrophy response
. In this regard, Schoenfeld et al.
(2015) conducted a meta-analysis and observed similar gains
in hypertrophy when training with repetition durations rangin g
from 0.5 to 8 s (to concentric muscular failure). However, it was
also observed that training at volitionally very slow durat ions
(10 s per repetition) is inferior from a hypertrophy standpoint.
The authors speculate on the existence of a possible threshold
velocity below which the hypertrophy response is impaired,
since it could not be a suitable stimulus to recruit all motor
units of a muscle—mainly high-threshold motor units . Nevertheless, the training programs analyzed in
this study were performed until concentric failure, which im plies
a progressive increase in fatigue along the set, reducing the
motor unit recruitment thresholds, thereby enhancing musc le
recruitment . From a practical perspective,
a wide range of repetition durations can be used to stimulate
hypertrophy, however, very slow repetitions (around 10 s) should
be avoided. Considering that the evidence on this topic is limited,
future studies on the eﬀects of variation in the duration of
repetitions must be performed in diﬀerent contexts.
Exercise Order
Multi-joint exercises are those that recruit one or more
large muscle groups involving two or more main joints,
while single-joint exercises are those that involve smaller
muscle groups involving a single main joint (
Haﬀ and
Nimphius, 2012 ). Speciﬁcally, multi-joint exercises generate
a signiﬁcant stabilization of the body, involving numerous
muscles that could not be stimulated by single-joint moveme nts
. However, the biarticular muscles do not
receive suﬃcient hypertrophy stimulation in multi-joint exercises
since, during their execution, these muscles maintain a rela tively
constant length. Therefore, single-joint exercises are nec essary to
achieve a better length-tension relationship (greater mec hanical
tension following the length-tension principle) and a greater
electromyography activity (a possible greater motor unit
recruitment) (
Schoenfeld et al., 2019b ). In this sense, to know
the best organization of these type of exercises within a resistance
training session seems to be a key factor in order to optimize t he
muscle mass gains. Nunes et al. (2020) conducted a meta-analysis
to analyze the eﬀects of exercise order on muscular hypertrophy
and the obtained results indicated similar hypertrophy respon ses
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 8 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
regardless of exercise order, although authors claimed tha t this
ﬁnding should be viewed with caution. In the included studie s
in which model B ultrasounds were used, measurements were
taken in muscles that were not the object of the investigatio n,
that is, hypertrophy measurements were performed on muscles
that were agonists in the single-joint but synergists in the multi-
joint exercises (e.g., biceps brachia in a bicep curl and in a vertical
pull). In the studies that used indirect measurement methods ,
no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found either, but these method s
have low sensitivity to identify subtle hypertrophy changes . Currently, we do not have enough evidence to state
proper guidelines and, therefore, more research seems necess ary,
including analysis of diﬀerent exercise orders with exercis es
on the same target muscle in which it also acts as the main
agonist, and not only as a synergist, as well as using direct
measurement methods on speciﬁc muscle regions (which have
greater sensitivity).
Time of Day
Human motor performance varies depending on the time of
day . The time of day in which maximum
performance is reached is called acrophase, which is around
6:00 p.m. attending resistance training . In
this regard, Grgic et al. (2019) concluded that the hypertrophy
adaptations were similar regardless of the time of day the
training sessions were located. These ﬁndings could be parti ally
explained by the similar levels of p70S6K phosphorylation
observed after strength training performed in the morning or
afternoon . These results suggest that the
time of day for strength and hypertrophy training should be
based on personal preference, although more research appears to
be needed to really verify if diﬀerences exist between traini ng in
the morning vs. evening hours. Future studies should consid er
the assessment of CSA at the muscle ﬁber level and individual
responses to resistance training at diﬀerent times of the day based
on chronotype (morning or evening) and habitual sleep cycles .
Periodization
Triplett and Haﬀ (2017) deﬁne periodization as “ the logical
and systematic process of sequencing and integrating traini ng
interventions in order to reach peak performance at appropri ate
times.” Two of the most used periodization models in resistance
training are the linear periodization model and the non-linea r or
undulating model. To compare the eﬀects of these periodization
models,
Grgic et al. (2017) conducted a meta-analysis and found
that at the same training volume, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences
were observed, although it cannot be guaranteed that the
same occurs with other forms of periodization. With these
results, the importance of training volume in modulating the
hypertrophy response was once again conﬁrmed (
Schoenfeld
et al., 2017a). For this reason, linear periodization does not seem
to be the most appropriate since it ends with the minimum
volume and it is suggested that the inverse linear periodizat ion
model, in which the intensity is decreased and the volume
increases, seems to be a better alternative since the maximu m
volume would be at the end of the macrocycle (
Prestes and
Lima, 2009 ). Even in trained subjects, who tend to present
an attenuated response to training, signiﬁcant improvements
in hypertrophy have been observed without having applied
any periodization model, simply with an adequate progressive
overload. This leads to questioning the need to implement
periodization models in resistance training programs . A possible consideration when establishing a
periodization model can be the motivational factor in order
to ensure adherence to training, being linear periodization
more suitable for individuals who want to record weekly or
monthly progress; while undulating periodization might be
recommended for those who enjoy more the variety of training
or because they have diﬀerent training aims .
Blood Flow Restriction
To optimize hypertrophy, diﬀerent strategies related to resistance
training have been implemented, highlighting the blow ﬂood
restriction . This method is based on
the decrease blood ﬂow to a muscle by application of an
external constricting device, such as a blood pressure cuﬀ or
tourniquet, to provide mechanical compression of the underlying
vasculature . In this regard, in with the aim
to increase the knowledge about this technique, Slysz et al.
(2016) assessed the eﬀectiveness of blow ﬂood restriction exercise
on muscle hypertrophy compared to traditional resistance
training. These authors observed that the addition of blow
ﬂood restriction to dynamic exercise training is eﬀective for
augmenting changes in muscle size, mainly when training
programs last at least 8 weeks and cuﬀ pressures > 150 mmHg
are used. Accordingly,
Lixandrão et al. (2018) demonstrate
similar muscle gains for high-load as compared with low-
load resistance training associated with blow ﬂood restric tion
techniques. Even though occlusion pressure, which is highly
dependent on the width of the cuﬀ, has been considered an
important variable in blow ﬂood restriction due to its abilit y
to modulate muscle adaptations, the results obtained show
total independent of the absolute occlusion pressure and the
width of the cuﬀ used (
Lixandrão et al., 2018 ). However,
authors stated that the occlusion pressure has been shown
to have a direct relationship with the perception of eﬀort
and suggest that blow ﬂood restriction with low pressures is
perceived as more comfortable and less physically demanding,
being especially useful in individuals with low tolerance to
physical stress. Future research on a possible preference of
the blow ﬂood restriction stimulus over type I ﬁbers seems to
be interesting.
Methodological Quality of the Included
Meta-Analysis
As assessed using the AMSTAR 2 checklist, the included meta-
analyses are classiﬁed as moderate or high methodological
quality. Despite the acceptable overall quality of the include d
meta-analyses, we noted, regarding to the GRADE quality
assessment, that 6 out 14 meta-analyses did not reported
information about the quality of the primary studies analyze d.
This methodological issue shows the necessity of establish ing
Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.or g 9 July 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 949021

Bernárdez-Vázquez et al. Hypertrophy in Healthy Adults
clear and speciﬁc methodological guidelines to apply in resistance
training meta-analyses to increase the robustness of the ﬁn dings.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the available meta-analyses, it has been observed
that volume, frequency, intensity, contraction type, repeti tion
duration and the application of the restriction of blood ﬂow
conditioning hypertrophy adaptations in healthy subjects, be ing
volume the only resistance training variable for which a dos e-
response relationship with hypertrophy adaptations has been
observed. Conversely, other variables as, exercise order, time
of the day and type of periodization appear not to directly
inﬂuence the magnitude of muscle mass gains. These ﬁndings
provide valuable information for the design and conﬁguratio n
of the resistance training program with the aim of optimizing
muscle hypertrophy.
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
From the existing literature some recommendations must be
considered when resistance training program focused on musc le
mass gains are prescribed:
a) Volume: research has reported a graded dose-response
relationship between resistance training weekly volume an d
muscle growth. Therefore, it would be recommended to
prescribe 2–3 sets per exercise, covering at least 10 weekly se ts
for each muscle group, while greater weekly volume does not
seem to oﬀer additional hypertrophy beneﬁts.
b) Frequency: although the modiﬁcation of this variable does
not directly inﬂuence hypertrophy gains, signiﬁcant eﬀect
favoring higher frequencies was observed when volume was
not equated, therefore training frequency can be used as a to ol
to modify the overall weekly training volume.
c) Intensity: the choice of light or heavy loads can be made
depending on the characteristics of the subject, although
always reaching or close to failure. It is appropriate to
prescribe variations in the magnitude of the load ( <60%
1RM and >60% 1RM), however higher load seem to oﬀer
greater adaptations.
d) Contraction type : it seems appropriate to combine both
concentric and eccentric contractions to optimize hypertrophy
response, however, it seems that eccentric contractions may
oﬀer some additional advantages compared to concentric.
e) Repetition duration: a wide range of repetition duration seems
to be appropriated to stimulate hypertrophic adaptations such
as 0.5–8 s, instead, longer duration (very slow movement
speed) is counterproductive, therefore it should avoid
extending the repetition duration beyond 10 s.
f) Exercises order : for the modulation of this variable, personal
preferences or speciﬁc objectives must be addressed, such as
deliberately overloading a speciﬁc muscle group. Currently, we
do not have enough evidence to state proper guidelines and,
therefore, more research seems necessary.
g) Time of day : for the modulation of this variable, personal
preferences must be addressed since no evidence in favor of
a speciﬁc time of day (morning vs. evening hours) have been
found on hypertrophy adaptations.
h) Periodization: individual preferences must be considered
when choosing the periodization model to use, but always
respecting the training volume and progressive overload.
i) Blood ﬂow restriction : it seems appropriate to use this
technique in widely experienced subjects or in those who
cannot use heavy loads (i.e., injured athletes).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RB-V and JR-G conceived the research idea, collected the
included studies, and prepared the manuscript. All authors
critically revised the manuscript, read, and approved the
ﬁnal version.